[Amit Varma]: Mary Oliver is one of my favourite poets and one of my favourite lines by her goes thus
[Amit Varma]: quote, everything that was broken has forgotten its brokenness, stop quote. I look around
[Amit Varma]: and I see much that is breaking and is fresh in our minds but will seem normal tomorrow
[Amit Varma]: and I also see so much that has been wrong for 75 years and we don't even think of
[Amit Varma]: it as a problem because it's part of the fabric of our lives. If we are lucky enough
[Amit Varma]: to be well off, the world outside our bubble is unseen to us. There is so much shit going
[Amit Varma]: on around us that we have normalised. There is no rule of law in this country for most
[Amit Varma]: people, women are second class citizens, our education system is broken, healthcare is
[Amit Varma]: broken, the legal system is broken, we still have the wild caste system with us, 3000 children
[Amit Varma]: still die of starvation every day, a quarter of our kids are still malnourished and at
[Amit Varma]: this moment in time, our society is being torn apart by anti-Muslim bigots who are destroying
[Amit Varma]: all that is best about India. And even if we sometimes do protest some of this, we get
[Amit Varma]: tired, we get back to our lives, the old abnormal becomes a new normal. It is what it is. That
[Amit Varma]: is why, on this show at least, I try to keep outraging, keep dissenting, maybe against
[Amit Varma]: a regime, maybe against a conventional way of thinking, maybe just against bad economics
[Amit Varma]: which is almost written into India's DNA. A couple of times a year, I get economists
[Amit Varma]: together and do an episode to take stock of the economy. Our problems are chronic, so
[Amit Varma]: it might seem like we keep saying the same things, repackaging the same old laments,
[Amit Varma]: but I believe it is important to do so. We cannot take the injustice of this world for
[Amit Varma]: granted. And a lot of this injustice has to do with economics. Bad economics kept hundreds
[Amit Varma]: of millions of people in India in poverty for decades longer than necessary. Bad economics
[Amit Varma]: is responsible for people slipping back into poverty today. Bad economics has humanitarian
[Unknown]: consequences and that's why we should never shut up about it.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and The Unseen. My guests today are the economists Rajeshwari Sengupta
[Amit Varma]: and Shreyana Bhattacharya, both of whom have been my guests before and have recorded memorable
[Amit Varma]: episodes with me. I recorded an episode on the GDP with Rajeshwari, how GDP is flawed
[Amit Varma]: in concept and messed up in practice, especially in India. Besides that powerful primer, we
[Amit Varma]: also did an episode where she and I and two other guests laid out our dream reforms for
[Amit Varma]: India. And Shreyana appeared on an episode from earlier this year called The Loneliness
[Amit Varma]: of the Indian Woman, which has since become one of the most popular episodes of the show
[Amit Varma]: and has struck a chord with so many people everywhere. If you haven't already heard
[Amit Varma]: it, I recommend you listen. So many TIL moments. Now, when I heard Shreyana was coming to Bombay,
[Amit Varma]: I thought it was a perfect chance to do a state of the economy kind of episode with
[Amit Varma]: her and Rajeshwari. Once they both agreed, I realised that we now had the most Bengalis
[Amit Varma]: that had ever been inside my home studio. They're both bong, I'm half bong, so that's
[Amit Varma]: two and a half bongs, which is appropriate for this episode because I wanted it to be
[Amit Varma]: like an adda. No structure, just chill together, ramble, talk about this and that, let it flow.
[Amit Varma]: We ended up speaking about economics, society, the imposter syndrome, how women manage in
[Amit Varma]: a male-dominated profession, how inflation affects women in a greater way than men, the
[Amit Varma]: problems with academia and Delhi high society, and so on. We answered a few questions that
[Amit Varma]: had been posed to us on Twitter. And at one point, we were disturbed by the loud sound
[Amit Varma]: of a drill from somewhere, which my brilliant editor Gaurav Chintamani managed to hide completely,
[Amit Varma]: but it still rattled us and I had to stop and figure out which flat it was coming from
[Amit Varma]: and get them to chill, and so on and so forth. You'll hear about that also in the episode.
[Amit Varma]: So well, I mean, enjoy the conversation. But before that, let's take a quick commercial
[Amit Varma]: break.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means I read more books, but also read more long form articles and essays. There's
[Amit Varma]: a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all face is how
[Amit Varma]: do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put the right incentives
[Amit Varma]: in place for us? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this awesome
[Amit Varma]: company called CTQ compounds, which aims to help people up level themselves by reading
[Amit Varma]: more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of the programs called the Daily Reader. Every
[Amit Varma]: day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects covered went
[Amit Varma]: from machine learning to mythology to mental models to even marmalade. This helped me build
[Amit Varma]: a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world a little better. So
[Amit Varma]: if you want to build your reading habit, head on over to CTQ compounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: slash unseen and check out the Daily Reader. New batches start every month. They also have
[Amit Varma]: a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with ideas, skills
[Amit Varma]: and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future Stack batches
[Amit Varma]: start every Saturday. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2500 if you use the
[Amit Varma]: discount code unseen. So hey, head on over to CTQ compounds at ctqcompounds.com slash
[Amit Varma]: unseen. Don't forget the slash unseen and use the code unseen. Uplevel yourselves.
[Amit Varma]: Shrayana and Rajeshwari, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest 1]: Thank you so much, Amit. Good to be here.
[Guest 2]: It's so great to be back, Amit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and I got to tell you Shrayana that your episode really took off. I remember after
[Amit Varma]: the recording, you asked me how was it and I said it's a classic. And it is now currently
[Amit Varma]: the number four most downloaded episode of the scene and the unseen.
[Guest 2]: Wow. All of that in Delhi.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. So yeah, that it is. And perhaps after the and it's very close to number three, so
[Amit Varma]: we'll probably get there. But the top four are kind of in a class of its own and everything
[Amit Varma]: is kind of below that.
[Guest 2]: So no pressure.
[Guest 2]: So no pressure at all.
[Amit Varma]: I will stay silent.
[Amit Varma]: You don't need to be spectacular.
[Guest 2]: Yes. No pressure again.
[Amit Varma]: Great. So I kind of want to start with you, Rajeshwari, because, you know, these days
[Amit Varma]: the episode has evolved into this form where I spend a lot of time talking to people about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, their childhood, where they came from, the backgrounds, almost like a little
[Amit Varma]: oral history, as someone called it. And while you and I have done a couple of episodes before,
[Amit Varma]: we haven't done that part of it. And I'm thinking, OK, I know how she thinks, but I don't know
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't know you. And I'd like you to start by telling me about your recent holiday,
[Amit Varma]: because just before this recording, you were telling me about this post-apocalyptic landscape
[Amit Varma]: you went to, where you were in the middle of the sea and there was no water, which is
[Amit Varma]: so fascinating. So tell me about that.
[Guest 1]: So thanks, Amit. And let me just start by saying I have no idea why people would be
[Guest 1]: interested at all in my life story. But since I'm here in the chair, I'll get talking. So
[Guest 1]: over the long weekend, we just decided to and we have been doing a lot of road trips
[Guest 1]: during the lockdown since we couldn't go anywhere else. And this is the first time we started
[Guest 1]: exploring Maharashtra, despite having lived in Bombay for the last seven years. So we
[Guest 1]: decided that we've been almost everywhere that people usually go to. And there's one
[Guest 1]: place that is left that we have been hearing a lot about, and that's Bordi and Dahanu.
[Guest 1]: So we decided to go there, a bunch of three families with all our kids and everything.
[Guest 1]: And little did we realize, of course, that Bordi and Dahanu are closer to the Gujarat
[Guest 1]: border, which means it's incredibly hot. But still, we went. And so one of the main attractions
[Guest 1]: of Bordi is the beach. So we go to the beach the evening of the day when we reach the place
[Guest 1]: and we find that there's a low tide. Now, what we know of low tide from places like
[Guest 1]: Juhu Beach, etc. is that the water recedes a little bit and then after a point it comes
[Guest 1]: back, right? Whereas on Bordi Beach, we discovered that the sea has literally retreated more
[Guest 1]: than 12 to 15 kilometers, if not more. So you can't see the water at all standing on
[Guest 1]: the beach. And what you see is kilometer and kilometer of what looks like mirage, right?
[Guest 1]: Because there's a shimmery because of the sun, the setting sun, the little bit of shimmering
[Guest 1]: on the surface, because it's all watery mud, because the sea has retreated. And it's all
[Guest 1]: slush and black earth kind of thing. And you can keep walking for about 10-12 kilometers
[Guest 1]: on the seabed, yet not reach the sea. And there was nobody else around, it was just
[Guest 1]: us. So exactly as I said, it really felt apocalyptic, because in the sense that you feel that it's
[Guest 1]: the end of the world, and the sea has retreated somewhere far away, and you can't reach it.
[Guest 1]: And at least for me, I felt this irresistible pull that I have to keep walking towards the
[Guest 1]: sea to find how far the water is. So we kept walking and after a point of time, I think
[Guest 1]: we walked quite a bit. And it was just us in the middle of this vast seabed with no
[Guest 1]: water anywhere. And the actual beach is far away, the water is somewhere else, and we
[Guest 1]: were in the middle of nowhere literally. So it was a surreal feeling. And that ended up
[Guest 1]: being my definition of having fun in Bodhi. But it was fascinating. I have not seen something
[Guest 1]: like this ever before. And then we went back the next day to see the sea has to come back
[Guest 1]: at some point of time. And it did, the high tide was spectacular as well. So that was
[Guest 1]: my long weekend, basically.
[Amit Varma]: No, and it's damn scary, because, you know, what one hears of the tsunami, since the tsunami
[Amit Varma]: struck in 2003, is that the sea recedes a lot, and then it comes back. So if I saw the
[Amit Varma]: sea had gone this far back, I would be too scared. I'd probably go further inland rather
[Guest 1]: than towards the sea.
[Guest 1]: In fact, we had to take a call when the sun was setting. And we knew that the time of
[Guest 1]: the high tide was approaching. And we had gone really far into the seabed that we had
[Guest 1]: to start walking back. And it's pitch dark. I mean, once you get pitch dark, there's no,
[Guest 1]: there's nothing whatsoever. So we had to take a call that do we keep going towards in search
[Guest 1]: of the water? Do we just walk back? So we all decided to walk back all the for a split
[Guest 1]: second I was in two minds.
[Amit Varma]: Wow.
[Amit Varma]: It was irresistible.
[Amit Varma]: So have any of you guys seen Krzysztof Kieslowski's films?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: I call it you know, the first great web series in a sense. He made a series of 10 films for
[Amit Varma]: Polish television in 91 or 90 or something like that called Decalogue, with each film
[Amit Varma]: being on one of the 10 commandments. And the first of those was called Thou shalt have
[Amit Varma]: no other God than me. It was based on that commandment. And obviously, I don't even think
[Amit Varma]: he's necessarily a believer, but it was just interesting reinterpretations. And it's about
[Amit Varma]: a guy whose, you know, son wants to go skating in a lake that has just gotten frozen up and
[Amit Varma]: he's complete scientific temperament and he does a math and everything. So he figures
[Amit Varma]: out exactly that it is not safe today, it is not safe tomorrow, it is safe on Wednesday,
[Amit Varma]: because that's where the temperature will be and you can go skating and nothing will
[Amit Varma]: happen and all of that. And not to give it, I mean, the spoiler doesn't matter because
[Amit Varma]: it's just such a great film and I watch it again and again. His son goes out and drowns,
[Amit Varma]: the ice breaks. And then the last shot of that little short film is that while he's
[Amit Varma]: at the edge of the water, and he's thinking about his son, in the distance, he sees as
[Amit Varma]: a homeless tramp who's lit a fire by the side of the lake.
[Amit Varma]: Ouch.
[Amit Varma]: You know, so if you get the connection with Thou shalt have no other God but me, just
[Amit Varma]: tremendous. And when you were speaking of doing calculations of what time the high tide
[Guest 1]: will come in, I was like, you fool, come back.
[Guest 1]: Come back.
[Guest 1]: Yeah.
[Guest 1]: Yeah. So my daughter, she's four years old. She was obviously scared because I mean, it
[Guest 1]: was surreal to me for her, she had never seen something like that. So she decided to stay
[Guest 1]: back on the beach and my husband was torn in between. Should I go with the wife? Should
[Guest 1]: I go with the daughter? So I think he also went more towards the beach. But then for
[Guest 1]: me, it was just, I mean, you know, you just felt, you just feel like you keep walking
[Guest 1]: and whatever happens happens. I mean, at some point you just hit the sea, nothing more happens.
[Guest 1]: But it's just that the time, it's just so far away, you keep walking and then it can
[Guest 1]: get dark, the high tide can come, you may not have enough time to walk back, all of
[Guest 1]: those things. So it was spooky, but it was fascinating.
[Guest 1]: Fabulous. And people say economists are boring people. What rubbish, what do you mean they
[Guest 1]: are?
[Guest 1]: Who are these people who say economists are boring people?
[Unknown]: Economists.
[Guest 1]: I'm definitely not one of them.
[Amit Varma]: What's the most adventurous thing you've done, Shreyana? Have you been reckless?
[Guest 2]: No, I have never been reckless. I think I've just written my recklessness away. And now
[Guest 2]: I'm leading the life of a very boring urban hermit in Delhi. I actually, you know, actually
[Guest 2]: listening to you, I'm realizing I haven't done any travel recently. I've just been broadly
[Guest 2]: in Delhi. And now with the book, a little bit of travel has now started to happen, which
[Guest 2]: is exciting. But I'm really looking forward to a holiday, which would be nice. But going
[Guest 2]: back to this thing about economists being boring, I mean, have you seen the current
[Guest 2]: conversations between all of us? It's like we're saying the same thing to each other
[Guest 2]: constantly and it's getting quite repetitive and boring. So it's nice that you're discussing
[Guest 2]: holidays now, because I do think that there is just general fatigue in the discourse.
[Guest 1]: I think that given that we are living in India, it's always very adventurous and exciting
[Guest 1]: to be an economist in India, because there is always something or the other that's happening.
[Guest 1]: I mean, being an economist in the US is damn boring, because nothing much happens there.
[Guest 1]: Being an economist in India, but one day you have a demonetization. One day you have a
[Guest 1]: you know, a lockdown that is announced with a four hours notice to the utmost misery of
[Guest 1]: most people. And then one day you have like a GST, which is implemented with the shoddiest
[Guest 1]: possible manner. There's always something or the other happening. And I just feel that
[Guest 1]: it's difficult to almost keep pace with how things are changing. And it's like last year,
[Guest 1]: we were thinking of the pandemic and the pandemic is receding, and the economy is going to come
[Guest 1]: out of it. And then bang, you get hit by geopolitical Russia-Ukraine war, then bang, you have US
[Guest 1]: inflation higher than in the last 40 years. There's constantly something or the other
[Guest 1]: happening. So I think there is, I mean, I don't get bored with the discourse, I think
[Guest 1]: primarily because in India, there is just so many shocks and so many policies gone wrong.
[Guest 2]: But I think that's the source of my boredom, which is that I think we keep saying things,
[Guest 2]: and then things just go wrong. And I feel like now we're just stuck in this cycle of
[Guest 2]: just anticipating the next thing that will potentially happen. And then a bunch of us
[Guest 2]: will write things and a bunch of us will say a lot. And then we have a set of institutions
[Guest 2]: and you're giggling now, I can see you, you know, who will ignore everything that useful
[Guest 2]: that has to be said. So you know what I mean? My boredom is not with the state of the fact
[Guest 2]: that we have analysis to do, although there's no data. And I know we'll come to that. I
[Guest 2]: hope we'll come to that. I really do want to come to that. But even if there were data
[Guest 2]: and we're using data, I think where my sense of the cyclical fatigue has come in is just
[Guest 2]: the fact that we say stuff, and then we all get very excited about it. But I just, you
[Guest 2]: know, it's, it's this, it's quite, I have to say, it's actually quite dispiriting. I
[Guest 2]: mean, at this stage, I sort of I feel that way. I'm curious what you think.
[Guest 1]: Yeah, I don't feel dispirited. At the same time, I wouldn't say that I feel extremely
[Guest 1]: optimistic either. Right. But I find a lot of I take a lot of confidence from the fact
[Guest 1]: that economists still have a lot of energy to keep doing what we are doing, despite the
[Guest 1]: fact that yes, I mean, things have happened. And whatever we are saying, whatever we are
[Guest 1]: prescribing and not being implemented. But at the same time, if you take a very long
[Guest 1]: arc of modern history, like even just like, even for India, like the last 30, 40 years,
[Guest 1]: no, even for 30, 40 years in India, right? I mean, where we were 40 years back, and where
[Guest 1]: we are today, definitely, there has been a significant amount of change and improvement.
[Guest 1]: And the way economists have analysed things, the way we have come up with policy prescriptions,
[Guest 1]: some of which has helped, some of which has itself changed. So I don't think yes, if you
[Guest 1]: take an immediate, short term view that okay, but crisis keeps happening, and we keep saying
[Unknown]: this is a mistake, and that is a mistake, and nobody's listening to us, right? But at
[Guest 1]: the same time, if you look at again, as I said, 30, 40 years, people have listened and
[Guest 1]: things have changed.
[Guest 2]: I don't know whether we have another 30, 40 years looking at the state of the economy
[Guest 2]: is right now, where we don't know there's a lot of debate about what's happening to
[Guest 2]: precarity in the job market, although I wonder about that. But I really wonder, I mean, I
[Guest 2]: think we need some very serious investments and decisions right now, in fact, given the
[Guest 1]: coming out of…
[Guest 1]: What has happened is, I mean, the reason why the despondency becomes bigger now is in the
[Guest 1]: current dispensation, at least. There has been an effort to keep, I mean, if I may call
[Guest 1]: them experts, or whatever you want to call them, right? There has been a conscious effort
[Guest 1]: to keep them at bay, to keep them away, and to not involve them in any kind of decision
[Guest 1]: making, any kind of policy analysis. And we have seen an exodus of people from India,
[Guest 1]: we have seen all the other economists have just withdrawn in their own echo chambers,
[Guest 1]: and we are just talking to each other, because nobody's interested to talk to us. And that
[Guest 1]: is something that I think the authorities and the policymakers have done, and they have
[Guest 1]: taken this decision that we don't want to engage with them anymore. But I also think
[Guest 1]: that this is a wave. I mean, again, I have a very long term view of things. And I think
[Guest 1]: it is a wave, and over a period of time, when they do realize that things are getting really,
[Guest 1]: really bad, and it's already happening. At some point, you have to start engaging with
[Guest 1]: experts, you have to start engaging with the economists and understand what exactly what
[Guest 1]: are the ideas they're talking about. I mean, 1991 reforms happened. And imagine the way
[Guest 1]: they happened till 1991, nobody was really paying attention to that side of economics,
[Guest 1]: so to speak, and then boom, it happened. And they had every incentive to roll back the
[Guest 1]: reforms once the crisis was averted, and they did not. They stuck to the reforms, and they
[Guest 1]: sustained the energy and the momentum of the reforms. And I think economists played a fairly
[Guest 1]: important role then. And since then, I think from 2010 onwards, particularly, there has
[Guest 1]: been a, you know, sort of slow withdrawal from expertise, from specialization, from
[Guest 1]: any kind of intellectual discourse. And I'm hoping at least that that's another wave and
[Guest 1]: soon they will have to realize that this is not working out.
[Guest 2]: I mean, if I look at just what's happening now, my sense almost is that there's almost
[Guest 2]: a lot of regurgitating of the common sense analytics and ideas and tropes of economics,
[Guest 2]: even amongst actually our politics or policymakers. But the impetus to take decisions, I mean,
[Guest 2]: I think the 1990s, in fact, that reform stories, you know, Amit's done so many shows on this.
[Guest 2]: It's a very powerful example of, well, we knew the ideas, but then it took sort of a
[Guest 2]: whole set. It's an apparatus, right, that has to act and then has to implement and roll
[Guest 2]: out and check whether the rollout is working in a certain direction. I'm not sure, I think
[Guest 2]: looking at the current state of affairs, where that apparatus right now lies. So I don't
[Guest 2]: think, and to me, remember, I mean, it's not just about economics in academic economics.
[Guest 2]: I'm thinking of the Indian Economic Service. I'm thinking of economists within the apparatus
[Guest 2]: who are supposed to form this crux of a core constituency that will fight for reform within.
[Guest 2]: And I think that's where I see a lot more despondency, just informally, what one sees
[Guest 2]: when one is interacting with government agencies, and just the general discourse. And so what
[Guest 2]: worries me sometimes is I almost feel that there's now currently like an incentive to
[Guest 2]: live in even deeper bubbles, more energetic and energized bubbles, because it's wonderful
[Guest 2]: then to be in that bubble and find like minded people who you can talk to. But I think beyond
[Guest 2]: those individual, I wouldn't even call them echo chambers, because I think that's doing
[Guest 2]: a disservice. I think they are bubbles of thoughts and very important thoughts. But
[Guest 2]: I just don't know beyond that. I mean, you remember, there was that fabulous book that
[Guest 2]: came out, I'm going to say before the pandemic, it had essays by people like Pranjul Bhandari
[Guest 2]: and Raghuram Rajan and Abhijit, on sort of all kinds of things that you could do with
[Guest 2]: the economy, really useful suggestions, and very concrete, actually, it was a very refreshing
[Guest 2]: book, because they really made it. I actually now almost wondered, you know, if you just
[Guest 2]: go back to those texts and just see, well, how much of what was low hanging fruit has
[Guest 2]: happened or not happened, I think we'll find very dismal results. And I don't think the
[Guest 2]: reason is academic economists are not energized and enthusiastic. I think there's a whole
[Guest 2]: community that's doing economics and the job of economic policymaking and decision making,
[Guest 2]: which lies within government, lies within local think tanks, support groups, lobbies,
[Guest 2]: I think it's a very complex set of actors. And there, I almost sense that there's a lot
[Guest 2]: of parroting of the words and the tropes. But the conviction perhaps, maybe conviction
[Guest 2]: is a very strong word, but the zeal to sort of say, we need to do this. I don't know where
[Guest 1]: that's evaporating. It's very sad.
[Guest 1]: There is also the element that, at least again, in the last few years, the way things have
[Guest 1]: evolved is that if you, let's say, believe in something, an economic policy or an economic
[Guest 1]: recommendation, it need not, just on the merit of the economic argument, it may not be accepted
[Guest 1]: as long as it doesn't echo with the sort of what I call the quote unquote party line,
[Guest 1]: right? I mean, unless you are really talking in terms of what they want to hear, unless
[Guest 1]: you are really saying, you're sort of playing to the gallery, even if there is an economic
[Guest 1]: merit to the argument, they don't want to hear it. And they're going to choose the arguments
[Guest 1]: of the people who are talking about stuff that they want to hear. Now, be that as it
[Guest 1]: may, I think at the same time, it is very important to keep talking about the ideas
[Guest 1]: and keep discussing and debating everything that we are doing. Because, as I said, at
[Guest 1]: some point of time, the need to pay attention to this will also be felt. I'm saying that
[Guest 1]: it is easy to feel despondent because we are not heard or, I mean, people don't hear us,
[Guest 1]: our voice is not being heard about. But then, at the same time, I think a time will come
[Guest 1]: that they will realize that this is not working and we have to do some course correction.
[Guest 1]: And so what are the ideas lying out there on the table and how much of that can be adopted?
[Guest 1]: So I think, I mean, for the sake of that future optimism, we just have to keep discussing
[Guest 1]: and debating and not give up. Because if we give up, that's almost like what they want
[Guest 1]: us to do. And, you know, that should not happen.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm just going to say, I agree with both of you. And I'm, you know, Shreyana, I find
[Amit Varma]: your pessimism refreshing because when we spoke in Delhi, it's like there are two different
[Amit Varma]: people, right? Shreyana comes to Delhi, she's someone else. She comes to Bombay, she's someone
[Amit Varma]: else. Bombay is very, Bombay vibe is very different. I wonder what's going on, you know.
[Amit Varma]: What's going on in Bombay? But there's a bandstand in Bombay.
[Amit Varma]: That should make her more optimistic though. We'll come to that.
[Amit Varma]: Because in Delhi, she was so optimistic that even I was saying optimistic things accidentally,
[Amit Varma]: you know, just out of politeness. But I am, of course, deeply pessimistic. So I agree
[Amit Varma]: with you that at one level, it can get disheartening. That okay, the rhetoric is all the same. And
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned that book in which all those people had those essays. The point is, those
[Guest 2]: ideas were great. They were concrete, as you point out. None of them were new. We've been
[Unknown]: saying that for 20-30 years, right? You had even people like Jagdish Bhagwati and Arvind
[Amit Varma]: Panagari are saying the same things. And then when they get proximity to power, just completely
[Amit Varma]: ignoring everything they said and everything they believed in to go in a completely different
[Amit Varma]: direction. But that is a separate rant. At the same time, Rajeshwari, I agree with you
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, our words may be pointless. If I may say our, it's kind of grandiose,
[Amit Varma]: but our words may be pointless. But it is in a sense our dharma to keep saying them.
[Amit Varma]: Because you never really know, like one sort of interesting point Ajay Shah made with me
[Amit Varma]: when he was on the show, is that he said that, look, the 91 reforms took that moment of crisis
[Amit Varma]: to happen. Yes. But what is important is that there was an infrastructure of people who
[Unknown]: believed in those ideas, who discussed those ideas through the mid to late 80s, which were
[Amit Varma]: the economists in government and all of that. And he said that's not there anymore. Exactly.
[Guest 1]: So, in fact, Amit, if I may add one point here is that we are thinking of our usefulness
[Guest 1]: from a policy perspective. I think that's taking a bit of a narrow view of what economists
[Guest 1]: in any field can do. Fine, maybe we are no longer a part of the Delhi North Block and
[Guest 1]: South Block and whatever RBI where we used to be called at one point of time for policy
[Guest 1]: discussions. But there is also a larger role that we have in terms of influencing minds
[Guest 1]: and informing people, creating knowledge and diffusing knowledge. Right. So the way I look
[Guest 1]: at it is, let's say you're creating knowledge or diffusing knowledge and you're trying to
[Guest 1]: fix the world in whichever small teeny weeny bit you want to do it. Maybe the last part
[Guest 1]: of it is a little bit broken because you don't have access to the real world policymaking
[Guest 1]: process, but you still have the responsibility of creating and diffusing knowledge and diffusing
[Guest 1]: ideas and then shaping people's opinions, forming opinions. For example, what I do a
[Guest 1]: lot with my students, now that I'm not obviously getting engaged in the policymaking process,
[Guest 1]: I engage a lot with my students because these are 21, 22 year olds and they are curious,
[Guest 1]: they're hungry for knowledge. And this is my opportunity to teach them something interesting,
[Guest 1]: to form their opinions, to help them debate, to provoke their thoughts. And they are the
[Guest 1]: future because they are going to, after 10 years or so, they are going to turn around
[Guest 1]: and say, you know, what this government is doing is not right or this is right. And to
[Guest 1]: help them reach that opinion, to help them reach that kind of a knowledge is also a very
[Guest 1]: big contribution that I think economists can do. And I think we should keep doing that
[Guest 1]: because we will need to form that opinion. We will need to bring up that critical mass
[Guest 1]: of people who believe in a certain thing. And I think that's very important, particularly
[Guest 1]: now when there has been an erosion of intellectualism, if I may call it.
[Amit Varma]: No, in fact, I agree with you. And I just say that that's why I do the show. That's
[Amit Varma]: why we write whatever we write, because the whole point is not because I'm very pessimistic.
[Amit Varma]: I don't think there is an outcome to this that I might even see in my own lifetime.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is you do the right thing because it is the right thing to do. Absolutely. You
[Amit Varma]: don't do it with an outcome. So I can be pessimistic and still put as much of myself into the work
[Amit Varma]: because I think of it as playing the long game, except it's a, you know, maybe some
[Amit Varma]: 15 year old girl listening to the show today can be prime minister in 2030.
[Guest 1]: You're creating a community and that community may play a very important role at a time when
[Amit Varma]: you may not even be around. And that's the contribution.
[Amit Varma]: This specific contribution that you have mentioned is really a public intellectual facet to being
[Amit Varma]: an economist. Now, you know, we took a bunch of questions on Twitter and a couple of them
[Amit Varma]: and we'll come back to your personal story later. We'll keep digressing in and out. Think
[Guest 1]: of it as a funky Bollywood structure. Oh, gosh. So we go in and out of different narratives.
[Guest 1]: Or think of it as an adder of two and a half Bengalis.
[Guest 2]: Adder of two and a half Bengalis is a great way to put it. Is you the half? I'm the half.
[Guest 2]: I think it should be more like two. Yeah, I don't think I, I mean, I've just been brought
[Amit Varma]: up too much in Punjab, but this is later. This is for later. So a couple of the questions
[Amit Varma]: actually hit directly at this question. Like, you know, Shrena, before you came over lunch,
[Amit Varma]: Rajeshwari and I were chatting about how economists often suffer from the curse of knowledge,
[Amit Varma]: that they'll know something so well that they'll assume that, oh, everybody knows this, we
[Amit Varma]: don't need to say it. And I realized sometimes it's not the case. Most people really want
[Amit Varma]: to know, they're curious about what do economists do. And a couple of the questions that came
[Amit Varma]: in indicate that. Where Monami at Monami DG on Twitter asks, how has their research contributed
[Amit Varma]: to or influence real change in the society? Right? That's one thing. And another question
[Amit Varma]: from Murugesh is, in which area, the theory of economics has the highest accuracy or probability
[Amit Varma]: of success? That's another thing. And there are different questions, you know, a couple
[Amit Varma]: of the lovely sort of sceptical notes that were struck. One is by Varun Das, where he
[Amit Varma]: paraphrased George Bernard Shaw. And he said, lay them end to end and see if they reach
[Amit Varma]: a conclusion. And another one, you know, Harry Truman had this famous saying, I want a one
[Amit Varma]: handed economist, because economists keep saying on one hand this on the other. And
[Amit Varma]: a Twitter user called up to a point asked the question, would an octopus make for a
[Amit Varma]: good economist? Because it can say on the other hand, seven times. But my entirely serious
[Amit Varma]: question there for a layperson is what do economists do? Right? Now, one of the laments
[Amit Varma]: of our friend Ajay has been that too many economists who have studied the subject and
[Amit Varma]: know the subject, then enter this long academic circle jerk where they take themselves out
[Amit Varma]: of the system, and they have no impact at all on the real world. And it is his lament
[Amit Varma]: that too many bright people do this, and more people should stay back like him, who actually
[Amit Varma]: try to make, who actually try to do things in the real world. Now, where do you find
[Amit Varma]: economists? You know, like, in Delhi, I understand there might be places you can throw a stone
[Amit Varma]: and hit one. But not that economists should be strong. No, but they might be. They might
[Amit Varma]: be strong. Very, very, very soon in multiple ways. But so tell me, what is the ecosystem
[Amit Varma]: for economists? Like, where are economists? What are they doing? Do they make a difference
[Guest 1]: in the real world? So, if I may go first, which is, so there was a time Amit when and
[Guest 1]: I'm talking of let's say in pre 90s, right? When you think of economists or statisticians,
[Guest 1]: they were all in academia, right? You would have this universities and they would be professors,
[Guest 1]: faculty members teaching students and doing research. This was the old traditional world
[Guest 1]: of economists. From there, we went through liberalization, privatization, globalization,
[Guest 1]: etc. And then I think the whole ecosystem of economists where they can go broadened
[Guest 1]: significantly and it's no longer just limited to academic economists going to university
[Guest 1]: teaching students and writing research papers that nobody can understand. A lot of that
[Guest 1]: happens as well. At the same time, for example, you have think tanks and this started with
[Guest 1]: the planning commission being the oldest think tank, so to speak, planning commission and
[Guest 1]: from there on you think of all the think tanks in Delhi, Bangalore, Bombay, Pune, all over
[Guest 1]: the place in India and globally as well. Where these are the economists have chosen not to
[Guest 1]: enter universities, you're not essentially teaching students per se, but you're doing
[Guest 1]: a lot of government work, you're doing a lot of policy work, which is also very valuable.
[Guest 1]: Also, then there are a lot of economists who are in demand in the corporate world. So,
[Guest 1]: all of these big corporate banks, corporate organizations would have chief economists
[Guest 1]: and other economists positions where they need this economist to talk to the foreign
[Guest 1]: clientele, foreign investors, domestic investors as well and that's a good service because
[Guest 1]: you are sort of convincing the investors to bring money into India, you're convincing
[Guest 1]: the domestic investors to invest in a certain financial portfolio and you're sort of helping
[Guest 1]: them understand what the economy, what's the state of the economy like. And that's also
[Guest 1]: I think a very important thing that they're doing. And also, for example, you would have
[Guest 1]: economists in India particularly, where there is this mix of you are an academic economist
[Guest 1]: who are in a university, you're teaching students, etc. But you're also involved in media writing
[Guest 1]: where you want to make economics more accessible to the common man and you're writing in media
[Guest 1]: on a regular basis because you feel strongly about these things, you think that you need
[Guest 1]: to have a voice and the common man and these are newspapers or media outlets that are being
[Guest 1]: accessed by educated people, let's call it that way. And therefore, you are no longer
[Guest 1]: keeping economics restricted to only those who understand the jargon, the math, the numbers,
[Guest 1]: you're trying to make it accessible, which I think is extremely important. And these
[Guest 1]: are also the economists who could equationally engage with think tanks, occasionally engaging
[Guest 1]: with the consulting world, with the corporate world. And then there's sort of the boundaries
[Guest 1]: get blurred, which I find is a fascinating development that has happened in this post
[Guest 1]: liberalization world, which was non-existent earlier. So that economists operating in silos
[Guest 1]: or economists sitting in ivory towers and completely inaccessible to the common man,
[Guest 1]: I think that has definitely changed significantly. And it's something to be quite hopeful about.
[Guest 1]: For example, I look at my coterie of economies that I hang out with, so to speak, almost
[Guest 1]: nobody is an academic economist in university, right? Everybody, either they have their entrepreneurs
[Guest 1]: have started their own think tank, or they are in a corporate world where, you know,
[Guest 1]: talking to investors and writing regularly in columns, they are writing chapters in books,
[Guest 1]: they are talking to multilateral organizations, it's all over the place. So the contribution
[Guest 1]: is no longer that one centric that either you're teaching students and sitting in ivory
[Guest 1]: tower, or you're sitting in a planning commission. It's a much more broad based contribution.
[Guest 1]: And that's why I think that we shouldn't only think of our usefulness from a policymaking
[Guest 1]: perspective. Even if that one thing has gotten suppressed for the time being, there are many,
[Guest 1]: many other things where you could be contributing. And I guess that's what to answer your question.
[Guest 2]: That's what economists do.
[Guest 2]: Maybe I can come in, you know, in fact, this relates to what I was also talking about the
[Guest 2]: general sense of despondency. First, let's start with who is an economist, right? Like,
[Guest 2]: let's just start with that. I completely disagree. I don't have a PhD in economics. I have a
[Guest 2]: job. It's very much a job of a jobbing economist. I work with people at the World Bank, many
[Guest 2]: of them come from very strong, almost jobbing every day dealing with the economy and real
[Guest 2]: terms in very different ways. Some work on infrastructure, some may work on tariff pricing,
[Guest 2]: some work like myself on the welfare state. So let's start with that. I think the biggest
[Guest 2]: issue I take with I think the economist community is while I agree with Rajeshwari that there's
[Guest 2]: a blurring, but I think there's a blurring as long as you have the same sort of status
[Guest 2]: and credentials as each other. You can speak to each other, you can almost scan your CVs
[Guest 2]: and you have a sense of what that means. There are lots of economists and young students
[Guest 2]: who studied economics. I go to Bhubaneswar, I go to like small towns in Chhattisgarh.
[Guest 2]: There are kids who have studied a master's who are interested. Some of them have joined
[Guest 2]: junior government services, right? So they are state carder officers. There are lots
[Guest 2]: of people who are very elegant in the way they think about using economic theory data.
[Guest 2]: They have a great facility for it. They may not have PhDs from the fanciest places or
[Guest 2]: they may not be in fact interacting with the world of status, be it think tanks, corporate,
[Guest 2]: so on and so forth. But they are actively using that body of knowledge in their everyday
[Guest 2]: decision making. I work with some of these young men. Often they are men. That is still
[Guest 2]: the nature of I think that's the other thing. One is who is an economist and economist is
[Guest 2]: often a man. So it's really lovely that actually we're both here. So thanks Amit for that.
[Guest 2]: And I think the first issue we do have to sort of start to think about and I think Amit
[Guest 2]: you and I talked about it during our last episode, which is how do you start to create
[Guest 2]: a community of thinking and practice around the economy that may not necessarily be involved
[Guest 2]: in academic production or production of research material for policymaking or for essentially
[Guest 2]: communicating to a future generation of students because I think that's a very different world.
[Guest 2]: We also talked about last time, Amit, that the point is not to impact policy. The point
[Guest 2]: is to change the way people think. And I think economic theory actually, perhaps sometimes
[Guest 2]: even more than data, has a very strong way of helping you make sense of the world. And
[Guest 2]: I see that. So I think the first thing I want to say is, you know, when you ask what do
[Guest 2]: economists do, I think the first thing we need to ask is who is an economist? And to
[Guest 2]: me an economist is not someone who just has a PhD from a certain set of schools who studied
[Guest 2]: it. People who have that obviously have a very, they play in a different league and
[Guest 2]: I think that's a different world. But there's a whole community out there who I don't think
[Guest 2]: are as vociferous and I wish they were. And I'm looking to that. And what makes me despondent
[Guest 2]: honestly is when you asked what do economists do? So there's the world that Rajeshwari just
[Guest 2]: described, which is actually I do agree is thriving. There's a lot of investment. This
[Guest 2]: is being supported. You start to move away. And in fact, there are think tanks which used
[Guest 2]: to be really well supported now are struggling with FCRA, raising domestic funding, raising
[Guest 2]: foreign funding for research. And I think there's a deep crisis of that. And when I'm
[Guest 2]: talking about these young men, they are again, I hope there'll be more young women in say,
[Guest 2]: you know, a small town or tier two town in a state in India, which is not Maharashtra
[Guest 2]: or Delhi. I think part of the issue is where will the financing, a sustainable model of
[Guest 2]: financing come from where a lot of these young men and women can be exposed to economic models
[Guest 2]: of thinking, which I think are really powerful, and then use them in their day to day lives
[Guest 2]: almost as if, you know, you're solving puzzles, which is actually sometimes what I think is
[Guest 2]: very elegant about the subject. I don't think we're doing that enough. I think what economists
[Guest 2]: tend to do is, Rajeshwari, I think has just summarized that really beautifully. Just from
[Guest 2]: my own example, day to day, what is my job? My job is, in fact, using a lot of that theory
[Guest 2]: to think about how different states in India design their welfare policies. How is the
[Guest 2]: welfare state functioning? In fact, I think one of the core areas where I think economists
[Guest 2]: and economists who don't necessarily, again, subscribe to a certain way we define economists
[Guest 2]: have really impacted the real world is welfare. I think Rajeshwari alluded to this, so many
[Guest 2]: NGOs, so many activists, actually, they come from the world of partial economics training,
[Guest 2]: and I can see how they've used those ideas, a kind of affinity to evidence based decision
[Guest 2]: making in their activism, which has been really powerful. And I think, you know, we owe a
[Guest 2]: lot to that. And I think what we need to think very carefully about as a community is how
[Guest 2]: is it that we can raise support and create a parallel ecosystem, which actually supports
[Guest 2]: this kind of knowledge generation, access to data, and it doesn't ring fence it around
[Guest 2]: just certain norms around what is considered sort of, you know, who is an economist by
[Guest 2]: status, but who is an economist by interest and by activity. And then, you know, you may
[Guest 2]: really be terrible at the subject, like I could never finish a PhD, it's just not, I
[Guest 2]: don't have the talent or the tenacity for it. As I mentioned earlier, I have different
[Guest 2]: kinds of talents. And that actually is a world, Amit, I'm very optimistic about. I think for
[Guest 2]: me, maybe that is where moving away what I will do in the future, I think that is where
[Guest 2]: I'm interested. But if you start to look at what's happening to that world now, it's institutionally
[Guest 2]: heavily constrained in terms of where it will find sources of just straight up market financing
[Guest 2]: to support it. You have, you know, I can tell you there are IES officers or state carder
[Guest 2]: officers working in different states in the country who want to be better trained. They
[Guest 2]: want to study more, they want to learn more. But the Indian Labasna and all the sort of,
[Guest 2]: you know, the institutions that teach theory or practice to these, you know, to officers,
[Guest 2]: they are limited in also what they are able to do and who they will include in their training
[Guest 2]: programs, the capacity, and I think you had guests here who've talked about this before,
[Guest 2]: the capacity of administrative structures to offer this kind of training is also limited.
[Guest 2]: Star economists do not go to, you know, small state carder training academies to sort of
[Guest 2]: train. I think that's starting to change. I'm very excited by some of the things I hear
[Guest 2]: J-PAL is trying to do with their partnerships. I think that's really the space where I think
[Guest 2]: economists, there's a lot of demand for economists to do stuff. And I think there could be buoyancy.
[Guest 2]: But right now, it's heavily constrained. And I think to answer your question, in addition
[Guest 2]: to I think what Rajeshree said and the question the gentleman asked about what do economists
[Guest 2]: do, I also think economists do participate, we can't walk away from the circle jerk. That
[Guest 2]: is a significant chunk of what I think a lot of economists are doing. And I face it and
[Guest 2]: you know, I've seen it, it's interesting, even with the book of the life of the book,
[Guest 2]: I've noticed what that actually means. And I think being a bit more empathetic to the
[Guest 2]: fact that there's a community out there that may not be participating in the circle jerk,
[Guest 2]: but is very interested, and is also in positions of authority and power, and also in their
[Guest 2]: day to day life can use this as theory data and make impactful, meaningful decisions.
[Guest 2]: I think that's really critical to me. So yeah.
[Guest 1]: One thing if I may add Amit is, it may not have come across clearly, but one thing that
[Guest 1]: I was trying to allude to is that there was a time when economics was considered an inaccessible
[Guest 1]: subject. Because it is traditionally very math heavy. It was more science than social
[Guest 1]: science. It was very heavy in statistics. It was considered that only a handful of people
[Guest 1]: who have a certain knowledge or bent of mind and access to a certain kind of training can
[Guest 1]: end up studying economics. And that limited the scope for economics. And that also, I
[Guest 1]: think, gave economics a bad name down the road. Because, you know, there's this notion
[Guest 1]: that if you're an economist, it's a very hard subject, it's a very dry thing, we are dealing
[Guest 1]: with things that we don't even understand. At the same time, economics fundamentally
[Guest 1]: at heart is a social science, right? It derives inspiration from what's happening in the society.
[Guest 1]: And therefore, I think somewhere down the line, we lost that connection that economists
[Guest 1]: need to be able to explain what's happening in the society and also communicate that to
[Guest 1]: the society. So we went into this whole world of almost every scientific theorizing world
[Guest 1]: where you're very good in your theoretical models, and you're doing a whole lot of cranking
[Guest 1]: of equations and math. But ultimately, what does it all mean in terms of intuition in
[Guest 1]: terms of the real life social impact, and very, very few economists would then make
[Guest 1]: the effort of bridging that gap. And I think, primarily in the US, for example, where most
[Guest 1]: of the economic theories come from, a lot of it was because economists there is all
[Guest 1]: university economist, with PhD, as Shaina mentioned, publishing in journals. So that's
[Guest 1]: a whole different ballgame altogether. But what I what I realized is, and I think I've
[Guest 1]: mentioned in the first episode with you is that when I came back to India, I realized
[Guest 1]: the world is much very, very different and, and much better, quote, unquote, compared
[Guest 1]: to what I saw in the US, because here there are economists who make the effort to reach
[Guest 1]: out to the common man or beat. And this has nothing to do with whether you have a PhD
[Guest 1]: in economics, when you don't have a PhD in economics, you have some basic training in
[Guest 1]: economics, you understand the world, and you want to explain the world to the rest of the
[Guest 1]: society. And there are people have made that effort, you're writing in the media, you're,
[Guest 1]: you're doing, you know, even to the extent that everybody listens to TV, even in regional
[Guest 1]: languages, right, you're doing TV interviews, you're trying to explain what the budget means,
[Guest 1]: you're trying to explain what's happening to inflation, what's happening to prices.
[Guest 1]: And that is very, very important. And I think that's a very valuable service that economists
[Guest 1]: and by economists, I mean, anybody who has a basic training in economics to be able to
[Guest 1]: understand things a little bit better than let's say, for example, what the common man
[Guest 1]: on the street would, but they are taking that effort to explain that. And to and that is
[Guest 1]: a world that I think has happened over the last 20, 30 years. And of course, there's
[Guest 1]: a whole long way to go, we are just only scratching the surface. But to the extent that it is
[Guest 1]: happening to the extent that people there is a critical mass of economists are at least
[Guest 1]: aware of this responsibility, and they're doing it, doing that, I think that that's
[Guest 1]: definitely a great thing. And in terms of funding, I think, this is a constraint across
[Guest 1]: all subjects, like even hard sciences, which traditionally would get more funding. Everybody's
[Guest 1]: struggling to get funding over the last few years, because there is this whole, like constraint
[Guest 1]: on intellectual pursuit or constraint on scientific pursuit, in terms of giving funding to universities
[Guest 1]: and institutions.
[Guest 2]: Can I just, I just want to just on one thing, I don't, in fact, I think that there has been
[Guest 2]: a particular squeeze put in and maybe Amit also, I think part of my pessimism is coming
[Guest 2]: from, I've just come back from Delhi, and I've seen some very dear friends who are trying
[Guest 2]: to just hold on to their organizations, with dear life, it's very hard right now, especially
[Guest 2]: if you're going to produce independent social science research, which invariably will speak
[Guest 2]: to livelihoods. I see this across the board. In fact, some of the most useful economic
[Guest 2]: data is coming out of NGOs that, you know, you take Ajivika Bureau, looking at migrants,
[Guest 2]: you look at a lot of the work that's coming out of different organizations, who are not
[Guest 2]: even based in Delhi or Bombay, they're not interested in that game. They are all being
[Guest 2]: squeezed. It's a very difficult time. And I think, while yes, sure, it's difficult for
[Guest 2]: universities and institutions, but universities and institutions will always fight. There'll
[Guest 2]: be corporates, there'll be, you know, patrons, there'll be alumni. When I look at these organizations,
[Guest 2]: which are almost trying to create their own models of economic investigation, actually,
[Guest 2]: a lot of theory is ground up theory, right? It can come from here. I think they can come
[Guest 2]: up with a very different way of thinking about how we theorize migration movements and labor
[Guest 2]: leisure trade-offs, for example, but who will finance that work? Because what I see, and
[Guest 2]: you know, maybe this comes from the fact that my first job ever was at a heavily underfunded
[Guest 2]: feminist think tank, where I saw my boss constantly struggling, this remarkable woman constantly
[Guest 2]: struggling to just organize funds. And invariably, if you link yourself to donor financing, which
[Guest 2]: is invariably what happens with think tanks, livelihoods organizations, donors are interested
[Guest 2]: and I don't blame them. I understand they're interested in certain outcomes, right? Which
[Guest 2]: always have to do with, give me a survey, give me some data points. But maybe there's
[Guest 2]: theory that can be built off that. There are lessons to be crystallized. And I just don't
[Guest 2]: see right now, and I see organizations really struggling to find core institutional funding
[Guest 2]: to be able to do that. And I think in that world, you will still have the dominant modes
[Guest 2]: of knowledge production, particularly in the social sciences and economics is particularly
[Guest 2]: politically very important because it is the economy, right? I mean, it kind of holds a
[Guest 2]: set of interactions, which hold tremendous power. And I think I see that. So I share,
[Guest 2]: I think what Rajeshwari says that, well, things have changed and that, you know, it's a much
[Guest 2]: more democratic space. Sure. I think there's a lot more than we can do. I often joke now
[Guest 2]: that I don't want to Brahmin explain the economy to anyone. I actually now just want to hear
[Guest 2]: where different theories come from. And I think there are things happening in universities
[Guest 2]: we may not even know about, right? Or organizations we may not know of. But what often I wonder
[Guest 2]: about is where will that almost the venture capital for that come from? And in fact, this
[Guest 2]: is where I think that the Indian private sector can come into play a really important role
[Guest 2]: because we know these organizations are going to struggle to find foreign financing. So
[Guest 2]: yeah, I think we have to think about just these very alternative models of supporting
[Guest 2]: these ecosystems. And that I think I'm very excited about because I do think that there
[Guest 2]: is a quorum of now young people, particularly in the private sector, who I think are thinking
[Guest 2]: about some of these things, especially given where we are right now as a country.
[Guest 1]: So I'll tell you that the peculiar thing that happens with the funding constraint, and this
[Guest 1]: I again learned after coming back here, is that there are certain fields which are fundable
[Guest 1]: and then certain fields will not attract funding no matter what you do. And unfortunately,
[Guest 1]: because I do macroeconomics, it is one of the unfundable fields, right? Nobody is interested.
[Guest 1]: Nobody's interested in understanding GDP growth rate, but nobody's interested in funding any
[Guest 1]: effort to actually understand the data collection process, right? Everybody's interested in
[Guest 1]: inflation because it affects the common man, but nobody, none of the donors is interested
[Guest 1]: in anything to do with funding monetary policy research. Everybody's interested in government
[Guest 1]: debt taxation. Nobody's interested in funding research to do with the fiscal policies of
[Guest 1]: the government. So I unfortunately work in a field where there is no scope to get funding
[Guest 1]: from anybody, right? Be it the big global multilateral organizations, be it the private
[Guest 1]: sector, be it anybody, right? And I woke up to this reality and I realized that while
[Guest 1]: I am at an institute where there is some funding coming from X, Y, Z, but there is also a push
[Guest 1]: to become more independent in terms of funding. So let's say, for example, if I want to start
[Guest 1]: my own center in macroeconomics research, I will never be able to get funding from anybody
[Guest 1]: despite the fact that I want to start the center in the university. And the university
[Guest 1]: itself doesn't want to do the funding. That's the whole idea of starting an autonomous center,
[Guest 1]: but I won't get funding. But then what do I have to do? If I want to get funding, I'll
[Guest 1]: have to change my areas of interest. I have to change my specialization. So for example,
[Guest 1]: if I start working on climate change, if I start working even on any topic related to
[Guest 1]: development economics, if I start working on renewable energy, right? These are the
[Guest 1]: fundable fields where at least there is some scope of getting funding, consumer protection
[Guest 1]: in finance. These are the silos where you can at least get some funding. So then you
[Guest 1]: start to think that, okay, if I want to stay true to what I understand, what I have a limited
[Guest 1]: training and I'm passionate about that, then how do I get my own independent funding if
[Guest 1]: I want to hire five RAs who are equally interested in these subjects and I want to pay their
[Guest 1]: salaries, where will I get the money from? But then does that mean I have to now start
[Guest 1]: researching in climate change, renewables, health, wherever the donors and the funders
[Guest 1]: think that they are going to get high returns from, right? So that becomes the distortion
[Guest 1]: in social sciences like economics where either you change your field to suit the donor and
[Guest 1]: the funder or you languish in this low-level equilibrium where your salary is just being
[Guest 1]: given by the university, but that may not be enough because a lot of constraints imposed
[Guest 1]: on you by the institute and you may not be having the independence to start a center
[Guest 1]: of your own where you can hire RAs, etc. So it's a very, very difficult world to negotiate.
[Guest 1]: There is no doubt about that.
[Amit Varma]: So a few strands I want to pick up on and I'll come back to funding, but first we'll
[Amit Varma]: kind of circle around the globe and sort of do that. And one is one of my constant rants
[Amit Varma]: on the show is this impression people have that economics has nothing to do with the
[Amit Varma]: real world. Who cares about these numbers and what is GDP anyway and this and that.
[Amit Varma]: And by the way, there were many questions on the GDP for us on Twitter and I just want
[Amit Varma]: to tell all of them that listen, you have an episode length answer on that because Rajeshwari
[Amit Varma]: and I did a long episode on GDP, which goes into all of these issues. Why is women's unpaid
[Amit Varma]: labor not counted? And so many conceptual problems with the GDP, practical problems
[Amit Varma]: with the GDP and so on and so forth. But my point always has been that numbers are people
[Amit Varma]: too. That, you know, economics matters because it shines a lens on real things going wrong
[Amit Varma]: in the real world to real people. A good economist will always make that distinction clear. Like
[Amit Varma]: one of the reasons I loved your book Shrayana so much was that's exactly what you did, right?
[Amit Varma]: You used the tools of economics, the frames of economics of thinking about problems to
[Amit Varma]: get to, in a sense, the core of the human condition, that this is what people are like.
[Amit Varma]: This is why a man and a woman in the same house can't speak, which is a great human
[Amit Varma]: tragedy. But this is why it is and you're using those tools to illuminate that, you
[Amit Varma]: know. And to me, that's the best of economics in the sense that it's okay. I see this entire
[Amit Varma]: class of economists who go to college, get their PhDs, get all of that. They'll be hyper
[Amit Varma]: specialized in sea trade between Peru and Bolivia between 1830 to 1844, right?
[Amit Varma]: I know who you're talking about. No, I'm not actually talking about anyone in particular.
[Amit Varma]: I never, I never, I never, I don't. It is my job to introduce the gossip into the, we'll
[Amit Varma]: come to that. We'll come to that. But on the other hand, the thing about economics and
[Amit Varma]: why I am so much in love with it, and of course, I don't have a PhD in it either. But one reason
[Amit Varma]: I love economics is I feel economics fundamentally is a study of human behavior, right? So if
[Amit Varma]: you're interested in human behavior, the economic lens can just teach you so much like earlier
[Amit Varma]: Rajeshwari you and I were at lunch and I asked a companion to ask me any question about anything
[Amit Varma]: and I'll give an answer using economics and it's a one word answer. And you know, and
[Amit Varma]: you can because the economic way of thinking just illuminates the whole world. Now taking
[Amit Varma]: that forward, when I think of, you know, the person who asked the question that what have
[Amit Varma]: you actually achieved? Now there are three ways of defining achieved, right? One is a
[Amit Varma]: top down thing where a government does something. Are you influencing policy at this point in
[Amit Varma]: time for the last few years? I don't think any serious economist has influenced policy
[Amit Varma]: in any way. Obviously, it's just quacks and crackpots and useful idiots. Yeah, and that's
[Amit Varma]: one way. But the point is, if you really want to bring about change, I've always said, don't
[Amit Varma]: look at the supply end of the political marketplace, look at the demand and get your ideas out
[Amit Varma]: there among the people, you know, in clear language, use those tools of economics, share
[Amit Varma]: those tools of economics so others can also apply them to their own lives in the world
[Amit Varma]: around you. And there I think within civil society, there are two ways this can happen.
[Amit Varma]: One is civil society organizations which do their own work in their own research, like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, Shrayana, you pointed out you went to Bhuvaneshwar, there are all these enthusiastic
[Amit Varma]: mostly men who are, you know, doing all of what they're doing. But the other is just
[Amit Varma]: this greater awareness among citizens of what is going wrong. And I think understanding
[Amit Varma]: economics, understanding incentives, understanding scarcity, all of that has a big role to play
[Amit Varma]: in that. And therefore, my question on funding is this, and I think it might have come up
[Amit Varma]: in a different form in our episode also, Shrayana, is that in everything else, I find that things
[Amit Varma]: like funding and support are in a sense, decentralized, and no longer so dependent on authorities or
[Amit Varma]: mainstream platforms. So if I want to write a book, for example, sure, there might be
[Amit Varma]: themes which are popular in the publishing world, which are chasing a formula and chasing
[Amit Varma]: a trend. But I can write what the hell I want. And in the creator economy, you are no longer
[Amit Varma]: dependent on gatekeepers. And you can, in fact, even crowdsource whatever funding you
[Amit Varma]: might need for your work. And increasingly, you see this in more and more ways, even if
[Amit Varma]: you don't call it crowdsourcing, everyone who's successful in the creator economy, you
[Amit Varma]: know, whatever they earn through what they do, they can put it into what they do next,
[Amit Varma]: as indeed I do. So is there then a possibility of, you know, economics escaping the circle
[Amit Varma]: jerk and escaping this whole game of having to influence policy to be influential? Because
[Amit Varma]: I think the greatest impact that economics can really have is that people see the world
[Amit Varma]: differently. Today, people look around them and you know, the sort of economic illiteracy
[Amit Varma]: and the how that affects the way they look at the world, it just makes me very pessimistic.
[Amit Varma]: But I think that's where we kind of need to work harder. So just some rambling thoughts.
[Guest 1]: What do you guys think? Again, it's not rambling, but I may be wrong in this. But I think what
[Guest 1]: happens is that at the end of the day, let's say you want to earn your livelihood as an
[Guest 1]: economist, right? You want to earn a living. Somebody has to pay you money, right? Unless
[Guest 1]: you have enough money that you can just sit on it and do freelance economist. I mean,
[Guest 1]: that also many people do and that's fine. But that's a very, very small percentage.
[Guest 1]: So let's not go there. So if you want to earn your living as an economist, somebody has
[Guest 1]: to pay you. And the question is, who's that somebody going to be? Is it very safe, a university,
[Guest 1]: a corporate, a think tank, an NGO, a decentralized local level organization? There has to be
[Guest 1]: somebody who pays you the money and whoever is paying you the money, it's not free lunch.
[Guest 1]: That entity wants you to do some things in a certain way, right? While we say that as
[Guest 1]: academics or as economists or as intellectuals, we have certain freedom, that freedom is also
[Guest 1]: not unchecked, unrestricted, right? Now, this gets significantly worse when you're talking
[Guest 1]: about funding agencies. Because when it comes to funding agencies, let's say I want to break
[Guest 1]: free from the university system, right? I want to break free from institutions, I want
[Guest 1]: to break free from think tanks, everything. And I just want to, as I said, set up my own
[Guest 1]: center where I can do whatever I want, talk to the common man, explain economics in the
[Guest 1]: common language, everything that I want to do. Who's going to pay me the money to do
[Guest 1]: that? The funding agencies are not interested in that. Unless you are doing this in the
[Guest 1]: field that they think will have policy implications, right? And therein comes the whole policy
[Guest 1]: circle. That unless the government or the powers that we are interested in this field,
[Guest 1]: the funding agencies have no incentive to fund that particular field, which means you're
[Guest 1]: back to square one. Then you suddenly don't have the freedom to talk about X, Y, Z in
[Guest 1]: economics that you actually are passionate about. But then you have to cater to what
[Guest 1]: the funding agencies want you to do and what the policymakers want you to work on. So I
[Guest 1]: think therein lies the conundrum that we haven't reached the level of sophistication of, I
[Guest 1]: don't want to use the word GDP growth, but we haven't reached the sophistication of a
[Guest 1]: certain level of income of the country where there is funding for any kind of discipline
[Guest 1]: that a person wants to study and research in. And therefore, because there is a pyramidal
[Guest 1]: impact, there is sort of like precious resources being allocated across a large number of disciplines,
[Guest 1]: economics sort of is on the back burner. It's compared to, let's say, the hard sciences,
[Guest 1]: compared to science and engineering research, which attracts a lot more funding. Economics
[Guest 1]: as a social system and other social sciences are worse off, but we are still better off
[Guest 1]: on that front. But even there, we sort of fall on the back burner. And then all of this
[Guest 1]: jostling comes about that what is the field that you're interested in? But no, sorry,
[Guest 1]: there is no funding in that. So therefore, you can't do anything in it. So it's not easy
[Guest 1]: to break free from that and yet sustain a livelihood.
[Guest 2]: I've been thinking about this actually a lot of late. And I think there are a couple of
[Guest 2]: things that I feel, which are actually in the realm of, again, what the McKinsey consultants
[Guest 2]: would like, low-hanging fruit. I think the first is, we have to think of more market
[Guest 2]: clearing mechanisms of matching demand for certain research grants with those who have
[Guest 2]: the resources to do it domestically. Because right now, I think we are living in a fool's
[Guest 2]: paradise if we think this whole situation with the FCRA is going to. It's just too complicated.
[Guest 2]: I also don't understand it enough, to be perfectly honest. It's just very messy. But I think
[Guest 2]: there are enough deep pockets domestically. It's just that they're financing a lot of
[Guest 2]: other kinds of work. A lot of money is going into invisible electoral bonds. It might be
[Guest 2]: nice if some of that is, you know. So I think some of it, I'm looking, honestly, to the
[Guest 2]: private sector. And I think I'm looking to technology platforms, VCs to say, can we think
[Guest 2]: about a way a certain proportion of the CSR funding is pooled and you create some kind
[Guest 2]: of a matching platform.
[Guest 2]: There is no reason, Amit, which you described about the creator economy cannot be true for
[Guest 2]: a lot of, and in fact, a lot of these research projects, you know what Rajeshwari described,
[Guest 2]: it's not expensive. It's not like you're asking for core institutional grants sometimes. It
[Guest 2]: might just be a small piece of work and there ought to be ways to just match. So I think
[Guest 2]: this is an open challenge to anyone listening to us or anyone in the private sector who
[Guest 2]: can create an aggregator platform. Let's try and think about creating something that does
[Guest 2]: matching, right? That's one. I think the second is, there have to be, I think, some rules
[Guest 2]: and norms in place to say that some part of the ICSSR, if I've got the acronym right,
[Guest 2]: and each time nowadays I mention this acronym, my friends in Delhi at least all look very
[Guest 2]: like the shoulders start to slump. I think there has to be some mechanism where, you
[Guest 2]: know, yes, of course, one is despondent about reforms, but institutions do change and institutions
[Guest 2]: have to be updated. We have to think very carefully about some of these social science
[Guest 2]: research institutions. What can be changed? And we do currently have a government, you
[Guest 2]: know, for good or for bad, is very big on administrative reform. There's a lot actually
[Guest 2]: that can be done, which will tow any party line, which will make anyone look good. So
[Guest 2]: I think we need to attack the fundamental problem, which is the way the government organises
[Guest 2]: is also being a principal funder of a lot of this research. Either we say, well, part
[Guest 2]: of the government should just get out of it. That's also a possibility. Or we start to
[Guest 2]: think very carefully about how do we, in the current contemporary world that we live in,
[Guest 2]: organise these institutions. So that's the second. And I don't think that that again
[Guest 2]: is so difficult, it's possible to do. I think the third has to be, we need to think about,
[Guest 2]: and this I know gets a little controversial, because this is where you start introducing
[Guest 2]: distortions. But I really do think we need to think about financing ecosystems in smaller
[Guest 2]: cities. There has to be some, I'm almost thinking like affirmative action for towns, where we
[Guest 2]: say that funding has to go to core universities in places which are really, because if you
[Guest 2]: look, I can actually show you a map right now. And I'm sure this is not going to surprise
[Guest 2]: Rajeshwari or you Amit. But funding is very geographically concentrated. Everything is
[Guest 2]: going. And by the way, it's not because researchers are often there now. In fact, many researchers
[Guest 2]: are in all parts of the country. But it's because the accounting ability, the capacity
[Guest 2]: to process the money, to do the procurement, all of that is actually sitting in the big
[Guest 2]: cities, which is where money goes there. If you start to put in rules, which almost create
[Guest 2]: this distortion and artificial allocation, maybe then we start to build, there were these
[Guest 2]: good governance centers coming out, for example, from Madhya Pradesh, I'll give you that one
[Guest 2]: example. Those organizations, they've done so much for the Lokseva Kendras and the right
[Guest 2]: to time bound services in the state of Madhya Pradesh. This is also true for smaller towns
[Guest 2]: in Karnataka, because they were doing governance research, but it was financed, some financing
[Guest 2]: from government, along with organizations coming in to support. And it worked really
[Guest 2]: well because now if you go to Madhya Pradesh, there is, I mean, for good or for bad, there
[Guest 2]: is a thriving community of people who can explain the governance structures down to
[Guest 2]: the bone to anyone who wants to understand, which is useful for politicians, is useful
[Guest 2]: for what you were saying, citizens, knowing more about how government is organized, right?
[Guest 2]: We need to put in these, there has to be some rules and norms such that the geographical
[Guest 2]: concentration of the funding pipelines have to just radically change. It'll make people
[Guest 2]: like me very unhappy because, you know, people like me want funding for projects that I want
[Guest 2]: to do based out of Delhi, but I think it's time that people like me were a bit more frustrated
[Guest 2]: and others received, I think, more of the allocations. I think that's the third. Last
[Guest 2]: thing, actually, I said three things, but actually I have a fourth thing, which is,
[Guest 2]: I really have been wondering a lot about if we were to measure our MPs or our MLAs on
[Guest 2]: the measure of economic decision making. I mean, it's a very, again, this is something
[Guest 2]: I've just been thinking about. It's very abstract. How do you start to crystallize that? It can't
[Guest 2]: be growth because it's not something that they control and Rajeshwari will get angry
[Guest 2]: at me if I even try and suggest that, but they have to be, is it roads? Maybe not because
[Guest 2]: that's done by the central ministry. Can we think about incubating a research group within,
[Guest 2]: you know, one of our larger, more prestigious think tanks? And again, this is an open challenge
[Guest 2]: to anyone listening who thinks very carefully about how do we almost create this kind of
[Guest 2]: evidence-based citizen-centric conversation around how well is my MLA doing when it comes
[Guest 2]: to managing the local economy? How much does the MLA even control of the local economy?
[Guest 2]: How much, you know, what can the MP do? Have they made speeches in parliament on, you know,
[Guest 2]: the way certain economic decisions are being made? How have they supported the GST rationalization
[Guest 2]: process as the government is trying to figure out how to implement it better? There have
[Guest 2]: to be methods through which we can hold political officials much more accountable on the economy.
[Guest 2]: I think what's happened is there was a method to try and do these citizen report cards.
[Guest 2]: It's happened. Often they're very simple service delivery measures. Often we, you know, ADR
[Guest 2]: has done a lot on corruption, right? Saying how many people have cases against them. But
[Guest 2]: can we think very hard about supporting, and again, perhaps this will require, you know,
[Guest 2]: large trusts and donor organizations or, you know, the private sector to support a very
[Guest 2]: thought through conversation on measuring, firstly, the performance of a political office
[Guest 2]: when it comes to at least the local rules of the economy that they do manage, because
[Guest 2]: it's not like they can completely wash their hands of it. There are things that do sit
[Guest 2]: in their control. And how do we sort of foster that conversation? I think, Amit, this goes
[Guest 2]: back to what you were saying as well, which is that, you know, we see, for example, with
[Guest 2]: the app, right? It was that conversation around corruption and holding MLAs and local officials
[Guest 2]: politically accountable for corruption that fostered an entire social and political movement.
[Guest 2]: Why don't we have that for lemon prices? You know, right now we're all discussing inflation.
[Guest 2]: Can we think about breaking it down in simple ways, so that the ordinary public who is consuming
[Guest 2]: this information can understand it, hold their local officials more accountable? Anyway,
[Guest 2]: so this is just a list of four things.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, a couple of, you know, with this last point, and I'll go back to the earlier
[Amit Varma]: ones, but a couple of issues that I see coming up here is, number one, our MPs can actually
[Amit Varma]: do nothing, they're powerless, partly because of the anti-defection law. I've had episodes
[Amit Varma]: on that with Varun Mitra and M. R. Madhavan, I'll link them from the show notes. But you
[Amit Varma]: can run parliament from an Excel sheet, MPs are not allowed to go against the party line.
[Amit Varma]: What the PMO decides is effectively what every BJP MP and MLA in this country is bound to.
[Amit Varma]: So what do you hold them accountable for when you don't have the power? The second issue
[Amit Varma]: is I'd done an episode with our mutual friend long ago, Shruti Rajgopalan, who has recorded
[Amit Varma]: with both of you in different ways. And also as a question for you guys, I'll bring up
[Amit Varma]: later, but which was about urban governance. And her point was that at the local level,
[Amit Varma]: there is a disconnect between power and accountability. That, for example, the person who's, you know,
[Amit Varma]: standing to be an MLA in Maharashtra or in Bombay, or who, you know, their vote base
[Amit Varma]: is different. Nobody is looking at an urban vote bank in Maharashtra, they're looking
[Amit Varma]: at all the different rural vote banks and all of that. Now, you might be worried about,
[Amit Varma]: you know, why is the garbage not being picked up from outside, but the person you can vote
[Amit Varma]: for does not control that. And the person who does control that is outside your control.
[Amit Varma]: So there is that disconnect between power and accountability, which is also a question
[Guest 2]: which greater local self-governance would of course help.
[Guest 2]: But you know, Amit, on that, and there is actually work in economics and in political
[Guest 2]: science coming out of the US, Latin America that shows when you start to even create noise
[Guest 2]: about holding local officials accountable, it also then fosters inner party friction.
[Guest 2]: Because right now what you have is one word goes because there's also not, you know, there's
[Guest 2]: no incentive for an MLA or an MP now to fight that or fight against that sort of party line,
[Guest 2]: because they are not necessarily being fully impacted or held to account for it. And I
[Guest 2]: think I see and I, my sense is if we actually, and this is, I think this is why it's an open
[Guest 2]: research question, to what extent can we hold political officials accountable? Or is it
[Guest 2]: just that there is only everyone in the Ministry of Finance and the RBI who can be held accountable
[Guest 2]: for what's happening in the economy? I don't think that that's true. I think there is actually
[Guest 2]: different levels and levers of control that are available. And either you're just not
[Guest 2]: exercising them, in which case then people need to know. And there has to be a more well
[Guest 2]: thought out method to do that. Because right now we just don't have that conversation.
[Guest 2]: I mean, in the US you have conversations around lobby groups, right? And we see that a lot.
[Guest 2]: We just don't see that very clearly in our country. But who is, you know, where are we
[Guest 2]: holding our political officials accountable on questions around the economy, if it isn't
[Guest 2]: them profiteering off the economy in corruption? I mean, in a different way. And that's something
[Guest 2]: I hope someone takes up. And I'm not completely sort of, you know, throwing that out just
[Guest 2]: because MLAs and MPs don't have control over all decisions. I think there's a way you can
[Guest 1]: do it. Sorry, go ahead. So I think accountability has become a pervasive
[Guest 1]: problem now, right? I mean, I see instances, for example, I was shocked that you do something
[Guest 1]: like demonetization, and you get away with it, right? And you win a large state election
[Guest 1]: right after demonetization. To me, that was a shock. I mean, there was not a single protest
[Guest 1]: all over the country, and it was a nationwide shock. And there was no protest. I mean, other
[Guest 1]: than some small sporadic protests in Bengal, but in Bengal, there's a culture of protesting
[Guest 1]: everything. But other than that, there was no protest anywhere in the country. And then
[Guest 1]: you saw the election results. Then you have the second wave of the COVID pandemic. And
[Guest 1]: we all lived through the horrors of it. And then you see the election results. And you
[Guest 1]: think and wonder, what's the connect between holding the state, the government at any level,
[Guest 1]: for what happened and who I'm going to vote for? So this, to me, has become almost a puzzle
[Guest 1]: that how do you enforce accountability at any level of governance when it's become very
[Guest 1]: easy for the government to win elections through bread and circus by providing rations and
[Guest 1]: cheap internet, where everybody's going to vote on the basis of short term gains at the
[Guest 1]: cost of long term pains. And therefore, where is the accountability for larger things like
[Guest 1]: any of the economic issues you talk about? You talk about health care, you talk about
[Guest 1]: education, you talk about corruption, you talk about infrastructure, things that we
[Guest 1]: like to talk about. But when you go to the common man, what is he or she voting on? She's
[Guest 1]: voting on do I have a cooking gas connection? Do I have water? Do I have electricity? Do
[Guest 1]: I have a house? These are also important. But what it has boiled down to is that the
[Guest 1]: government is using its limited resources to provide basic goods and services, as opposed
[Guest 1]: to providing public goods and services, so to speak. And therefore, that accountability
[Guest 1]: mechanism, I am happy because I can access clean water, clean cooking gas and a house,
[Guest 1]: which for large spools of Indian population, that's very important. So am I going to hold
[Guest 1]: the government accountable for rendering 86% of the cash invalid overnight? My life is
[Guest 1]: miserable as it is, it's a little bit marginally miserable, but at least I have access to clean
[Guest 1]: gas and clean water, etc. So I think, what is the connect of the citizen with the government?
[Guest 1]: Does the average citizen even interact with the government on a regular basis? And I don't
[Guest 1]: think they do. So therefore, in the minds of the citizenry, government is somebody who's
[Guest 1]: providing maybe the basic goods and services, I'm happy with it. And therefore, come elections,
[Guest 1]: for whatever compulsions, I'm going to vote for such and such local party member. Beyond
[Guest 1]: that, they're not holding the government accountable for any of the things that we think are important.
[Guest 1]: So I think there is a disconnect between that interaction between government on a day to
[Guest 1]: day basis and a citizen's daily life. And it's very easy for a government to sort of
[Guest 1]: win over that interaction by providing these basic goods, which is exactly what has gotten
[Guest 1]: entrenched in Indian polity over the last several decades. So who do you hold accountable
[Guest 1]: for what? I mean, how do you hold RBI accountable for what it's doing? How do you hold Ministry
[Guest 1]: of Finance? I'm not even going at the decentralised level. At the centralised level, there's no
[Guest 1]: accountability. At the decentralised level, there's no accountability. I mean, think of
[Guest 1]: the Bengal elections. I know Bengal because I'm from Bengal. How do you win elections?
[Guest 1]: You float a lot of schemes which are women-centric. Women come out in hordes to cast votes. That's
[Guest 1]: a remarkable thing. Great. But why are the women voting? Because most of the schemes
[Guest 1]: are directed towards women. Is there any emphasis on job creation? Is there any emphasis on
[Guest 1]: actually building infrastructure assets or anything that's going to promote long term
[Guest 1]: sustainable job creation and growth? No. So it's become increasingly easy for political
[Guest 1]: parties to win elections, which is what they most care about. And in that kind of a system
[Guest 1]: where you can just win elections by providing freebies and basic goods, how do you hold
[Guest 2]: anybody accountable? Where is the accountability? I hear what Rajeshwari is saying. I disagree
[Guest 2]: with the, now this is my Bengali lefty self, the little bit of the Bengali in me. I'm kidding.
[Guest 2]: But I disagree with, they're not freebies because we do live in a world, particularly
[Guest 2]: coming out of the pandemic, where most of the country is between the poverty line and
[Guest 2]: twice the poverty line. I mean, this is a, we are, it's a really dire situation. Extreme
[Guest 2]: poverty has reduced in India, continues to reduce, but precarity has just increased incredible
[Guest 2]: levels. We know from RCTs across the globe and also work that's happening in India that
[Guest 2]: you need some assurance and these transfers are very important. I think what needs to
[Guest 2]: happen and I know maybe we'll come to this later. I think one of the core reforms that
[Guest 2]: certainly something in my work I'm really pushing is India needs to have a social protection
[Guest 2]: policy. What other countries would call a social protection policy. I think it links
[Guest 2]: to what Rajeshwari is saying, which is you need to have a fiscal path on which these
[Guest 2]: kinds of entitlements and programs operate. So if you look at, you know, Brazil or Mexico
[Guest 2]: and many of these countries, you essentially have a very clear policy path, which says
[Guest 2]: certain X share on spending, there are limits and rules, there are rules of the game. I
[Guest 2]: think what's happened here is you have 20 pension schemes, they're targeting the same
[Guest 2]: person and often the person who's supposed to get it doesn't get it, right? There are
[Guest 2]: all these issues. I think there has to be a way and first you need to bind different
[Guest 2]: groups of government into a policy framework. Right now, we don't think about it like that.
[Guest 2]: I think some states are thinking about it like that. And I am hoping, you know, in the
[Guest 2]: future that this is something that the national government at least will have to think about
[Guest 2]: because it's also fiscally unsustainable beyond a path. Having said that, I think I agree
[Guest 2]: with everything Rajeshwari just said. But what I will say is, I mean, jobs, for example,
[Guest 2]: it's just fascinating to me, jobs and inflation, actually. And I'm curious to hear what Rajeshwari
[Guest 2]: and you Amit have to say. I don't know, coming out of the UP election, I think all of us
[Guest 2]: had this moment of tremendous, I don't know, I don't even call it pause. I think it was
[Guest 2]: just somewhat, because is it the case that jobs just don't matter anymore? I was seeing
[Guest 2]: some really interesting journalists reporting out of UP essentially saying, similar to what
[Guest 2]: I think Rajeshwari is saying, which is that as long as you have a core set of entitlements,
[Guest 2]: but it's interesting because I also know the data and UP to know that the people who actually
[Guest 2]: are targeted for, I mean, who should be receiving priority for those entitlements don't get
[Guest 2]: the full basket. Is it that jobs just don't politically matter? I think that's an open
[Guest 2]: question and honestly, it's something that I don't have an answer to. I know that women's
[Guest 2]: jobs don't matter at all. I don't think anyone cares. I think we are very happy with equilibrium
[Guest 2]: in the employment landscape when it comes to women. But I'm wondering whether jobs just
[Guest 2]: have stopped mattering as a political issue. I mean, did they matter in the history of
[Guest 2]: our country's economy? I wonder, I mean, this is a question for us to think about. And the
[Guest 2]: same for inflation. I mean, look at what's happening right now. Now, in fact, I do see,
[Guest 2]: of course, the opposition has picked up on it. But I wonder that, and I don't know if
[Guest 2]: it's just, honestly, Rajeshwari, I don't know whether it's just that you've been sedated
[Guest 2]: as an electorate through welfare, because actually not everyone is receiving the welfare
[Guest 2]: transfers. I mean, it's not also, we saw what happened with migrants going back during the
[Guest 2]: crisis. The One Nation One Ration card is yet to fully take off. It's not the case that
[Guest 2]: everybody's receiving the entitlements. In fact, you have activists arguing for deeper
[Guest 2]: entitlements because there are concerns about some people just being completely left out.
[Guest 2]: So I wonder what's going on. I mean, what are you, I mean, if jobs and inflation are
[Guest 2]: not political issues anymore, which all of us in our one training were told that, well,
[Guest 2]: they are, they should be. I wonder what is the labour market now? Is the labour market
[Guest 2]: basically getting paid to, I don't know, harass people online? I mean, are those the jobs
[Guest 2]: that we are going to create? I wonder, is that now what the job market is? It's an open
[Guest 1]: question to both of you.
[Guest 1]: So I have several points to make, Amit, if I can. So one is that I do agree that the
[Guest 1]: pandemic was obviously, it's an outlier rare event, right? And when a rare event like this
[Guest 1]: hits a country, you need to do redistribution because the situation is absolutely dire.
[Guest 1]: But I think there is a case to be made that redistribution should focus more on rare events
[Guest 1]: rather than become a norm. And I think what we have internalised is we have a redistributive
[Guest 1]: model of development. And that is what we have internalised over the decades. And that
[Guest 1]: is what gets used in election cycle to basically win the elections. And that's where the accountability
[Guest 1]: breaks down, right? So basically, I guess what I'm trying to say is that if the common
[Guest 1]: voter is happy with the basic goods that are being provided, irrespective of a pandemic,
[Guest 1]: then what is the incentive of that common voter to say that, no, I'm going to hold you
[Guest 1]: accountable for all these other problems that's happening in my locality, right? I think that
[Guest 1]: incentive structure is very weak. And that is something that has somehow smoothly happened.
[Guest 1]: If there's one thing that has smoothly happened in India over the decades, it is this idea
[Guest 1]: that you can give the common man these basic goods and services and he or she is okay with
[Guest 1]: it because you're starting from such a low level, but you provide that and they need
[Guest 1]: that basic standard of life and the government is providing that. And then they no longer
[Guest 1]: feel the necessity to hold the government accountable for all the things that we think
[Guest 1]: are important in the long run, right? And the second thing is, I think jobs were never
[Guest 1]: really that important when it came to winning elections, right? Because India traditionally
[Guest 1]: has had a very high unemployment rate or a very low employment rate, because I don't
[Guest 1]: particularly trust the official unemployment numbers. But if I just look at CMI's, Labour
[Guest 1]: Force Participation Rate, right, we've always had a very miserable statistic as far as jobs
[Guest 1]: is concerned. So any incremental improvement on that almost feels like something great
[Guest 1]: has happened. And I completely agree that women's abysmally low LFPR just does not matter
[Guest 1]: to anybody. That's not even an electoral agenda. But basically, the fact that jobs have never
[Guest 1]: really been a decision making point when it comes to winning elections says a lot about
[Guest 1]: what is it that the people of India really care about, right? And that's where I think,
[Guest 1]: if you're getting the welfare entitlements, and you're okay, and you're not holding the
[Guest 1]: government responsible for not having jobs. So I think the accountability is not directly
[Guest 1]: being lined with the government not providing jobs. But I think what does matter is inflation.
[Guest 1]: In fact, 2014 election was lost on two counts, I think one was corruption, and one was inflation,
[Guest 1]: because prices were exorbitantly high. And inflation is like the tax on the poor people,
[Guest 1]: right? And it's the worst tax on the poor people. So when you have uncontrollable inflation
[Guest 1]: that you're just not able to manage, I think that definitely becomes a very deep political
[Guest 1]: problem. And that's what I would be very curious to see what happens in 2024. Because we definitely
[Guest 1]: have lost control on inflation, the way things are looking like. So I think jobs is something
[Guest 1]: that the voter perhaps does not worry about as much when it comes to voting, but inflation
[Guest 1]: definitely something and corruption. I think one of the reasons the government got away
[Guest 1]: with demonetization was that the selling point was this is an anti-corruption measure. And
[Guest 1]: they feel so the average person feels so strongly about corruption, that it was easy to even
[Guest 1]: get away with something like demonetization. But I think inflation will be much harder
[Guest 1]: to get away with and something has to be done soon. But yeah, I constantly worry about accountability.
[Guest 1]: I mean, in a democracy, our only weapon of holding the government accountable is elections.
[Guest 1]: And if that's where this whole connect has broken down, how do you hold anybody accountable?
[Amit Varma]: I think I'll double down on what you just said and what you said earlier, because that
[Amit Varma]: was actually the third doubt I had about your point of making politicians more accountable
[Amit Varma]: through good economics. Because my cynical take there is that ultimately, you hold people
[Amit Varma]: accountable on the basis of what you believe about them. And it comes down to narratives,
[Amit Varma]: not facts. And often good economic narratives are much harder to sell. For example, I think
[Amit Varma]: we'd all agree that you should allow every eye in retail, because it's good for people
[Amit Varma]: at large, and so on and so forth. I mean, hardly needs to be stated. But it's very easy
[Amit Varma]: for a politician to oppose it by saying what about the small traders, what will happen
[Amit Varma]: to their livelihoods, you know, look at the scene effects and not the unseen effects around
[Amit Varma]: the line, so on and so forth. And those narrative battles are ones which are hard to win.
[Guest 1]: I'll give you another big example, Amit. For the longest of time, we were fighting with
[Guest 1]: this FRDI bill, which is resolution of financial firms, right. And it's a very, very important
[Guest 1]: policy step to take. Because while we have a bankruptcy procedure, when non financial
[Guest 1]: firms go bankrupt, and how do you just resolve them, there is absolutely nothing for financial
[Guest 1]: firms, for banks, etc. Of course, it's a different matter in India, banks never fail. But that's
[Guest 1]: that doesn't mean that they are healthy. I mean, it's just like a, you know, facade
[Guest 1]: that that we are all very comfortable with. But then how do you deal with failed financial
[Guest 1]: firms, and there was a bill that was almost tabled, and a lot of people we know, they
[Guest 1]: worked on the bill, but then the FRDI bill got completely shelved, because the narrative
[Guest 1]: got spun in a very different way that the common man is going to lose bank deposits,
[Guest 1]: the common man is going to get the raw deal, because there is no insurance against deposits,
[Guest 1]: and what's going to happen. And immediately, the whole political narrative changed, and
[Guest 1]: you lost the popular support, and the bill got shelved. But I guess that therein lies
[Guest 1]: the importance of the powers that be to realize what is important for the economy in the long
[Guest 1]: run, or for the country for the long run as a strategy, as opposed to just selling something
[Amit Varma]: that will be very popular for the voters. But you know, that's again, never going to
[Amit Varma]: happen. Because you know, public choice theory would tell you the politician is focused on
[Amit Varma]: the next elections. And that's our constant conundrum.
[Guest 2]: But you know, but here's the thing. So, you know, just a couple of things. So let's
[Guest 2]: take Chhattisgarh, as I'm just going to keep going back to Chhattisgarh for some reason.
[Guest 2]: Chhattisgarh was one of the first states after Tamil Nadu to say, well, we'll universalize
[Guest 2]: the food ration program, right? And you did have that particular Mr. Raman Singh's government,
[Guest 2]: they came back to power a few times, but eventually they lost as well. And it's not for
[Guest 2]: the welfare transfers were working well. There are many states, in fact, where they've
[Guest 2]: universalized the welfare programs, a core set, and yet you've had churn. And so clearly
[Guest 2]: there is, you know, I want us to sort of think a bit more critically, because I think it's
[Guest 2]: become now, I hear this amongst a lot of economists, which is well, you know, it's sort of,
[Guest 2]: it's just welfare for votes or handouts, right? It's just another word I don't like.
[Guest 2]: I think there's something deeper going on. I think what's happening is,
[Guest 2]: it's also in relation to what's happening to other markets, because if you have a job
[Guest 2]: market, that's always been precarious. I think part of the reason why jobs have never really
[Guest 2]: been a political agenda, and this is going back to, you know, you have a largely informal
[Guest 2]: economy, jobs are extremely ad hoc, they are human arrangements, right? What are jobs?
[Guest 2]: I mean, it's a set of relationships. And in that world where there's always flux,
[Guest 2]: I'm not surprised that people think that, well, you know, politicians can necessarily
[Guest 2]: not intervene. However, what did happen was there was NREGA. And when NREGA did happen,
[Guest 2]: it has completely, I mean, there are studies that show really rigorous work that shows
[Guest 2]: it has radically transformed the, you know, the reservation wage for someone involved
[Guest 2]: in the rural economy. And that's really important intervention. Now, I don't see again in politics,
[Guest 2]: people necessarily, perhaps after a certain point, holding any politician accountable
[Guest 2]: for how well NREGA is functioning in a particular state. And in some states NREGA ought to function
[Guest 2]: because agrarian job markets and labor markets are really breaking down. And you would think
[Guest 2]: in that context, and especially in inflationary context as well, NREGA is self-selection,
[Guest 2]: you're supposed to demand that work. And it is a job market intervention. I mean, it's
[Guest 2]: not just a welfare scheme, it's actually trying to attack the labor market. And yet I don't
[Guest 2]: see, it's not necessarily yet as politicized a scheme as at a point of time it used to
[Guest 2]: be, right? And I wonder, and I don't have an answer for this. I mean, these are just
[Guest 2]: questions I have, I wonder what's going on. Maybe I think if I may just interrupt, maybe
[Guest 1]: because the NREGA was, I mean, and I agree, it's a brilliant scheme. And I think we should
[Guest 1]: have an urban NREGA as well after what happened in the pandemic. But I think it's because
[Guest 1]: NREGA was essentially a brainchild of the previous government. And maybe that's the
[Guest 1]: government. And maybe that's why we don't see NREGA come repeatedly and showcased as,
[Guest 1]: because it is a successful strategy. And in fact, it was a savior during the pandemic.
[Guest 1]: But what we saw in the budget is that the government has actually reduced the allocation
[Guest 1]: on NREGA. And maybe that would not have happened if it was their brainchild. But I'm just brainstorming
[Guest 2]: at this point of time.
[Guest 2]: Yeah, but I think Rajeshwari, actually, I do have to say, I think when it comes to welfare,
[Guest 2]: there's tremendous continuity across political lines. In fact, that's one thing that's very
[Guest 2]: interesting about the Indian polity. And I know that that bothers some who think about
[Guest 2]: it as sort of, well, again, you know, as you were saying, like this sort of distorts clear
[Guest 2]: accountability mechanisms, distorts other markets as well, right? But what's interesting
[Guest 2]: to me, for example, is NREGA actually for the previous budgets, the allocations actually
[Guest 2]: increased under a different political dispensation. In fact, this government has used the National
[Guest 2]: Food Security Act to even open up further. So I almost see this deepening. I think what's
[Guest 2]: happening, though, is that while the welfare story is sort of, you know, moving along a
[Guest 2]: certain path, I think the question really is, we now have a welfare system, which is
[Guest 2]: very broad, in that there are lots of schemes. Currently, there are around 464 national programs.
[Guest 2]: States have their own, a state like Kerala even has programs at the panchayat level.
[Guest 2]: And yet the depth is very limited. So the actual amount that people are receiving is
[Guest 2]: very small. And I suspect actually, the reason why you almost have this rewarding of schemes
[Guest 2]: is precisely because you don't have one large lump sum transfer. My sense is that if we
[Guest 2]: actually thought very cohesively in a way about welfare, it would actually be beneficial
[Guest 2]: for politicians as well, because you could say, well, this is a national transfer. Maybe
[Guest 2]: the state government does a top up NREGA and PDS function. And then let's think about
[Guest 2]: consolidating all these other legacy programs. But I just don't, again, and this is
[Guest 2]: something that is good politics, it would be good economics. But I just don't see again,
[Guest 2]: the energy to sort of move in that direction. Perhaps we'll see it. There is an election
[Guest 2]: coming up soon. Maybe we'll see it. But I think to just go back to, I agree with what
[Guest 2]: you said, Rajeshwari, but I also wonder, you know, I think the reason why welfare keeps
[Guest 2]: coming up to be this important electoral almost issue is because actually, the benefits
[Guest 2]: are so small, and you're not even guaranteed if you work on NREGA. We know studies show
[Guest 2]: you don't even know when you will get your wages. There are wage backlogs for a very
[Guest 2]: long period of time. And so I think, you know, there is this, so it's almost transactional
[Guest 2]: because the actual depth of the benefits and what people are receiving is so unsure and
[Guest 2]: insecure. So I think, Amit, going back to the question, I think the idea of holding
[Guest 2]: a local politician accountable for good economic choices, it's not just sort of, you know,
[Guest 2]: what can you do on broad budget, broad bills and budget bills, and so on and so forth.
[Guest 2]: I think it's also the local economy, because there are roles. And again, this is a research
[Guest 2]: question. What are the roles and levers that a local politician has to impact the local
[Guest 2]: labour market? I'm thinking of NREGA as one of them, because they do exert tremendous
[Guest 2]: influence on the way panchayats are able to administer or push them to administer certain
[Guest 2]: programs. I wonder if there are others as well. I suspect PM Kisan is one of them, just
[Guest 2]: as an example. It's the quasi basic income for certain groups of farmers. And I think
[Guest 2]: that's where I think we should think a bit more carefully. But how do we start to at
[Guest 2]: least generate more evidence, which I realised then goes back to that circle of when we need
[Guest 2]: to raise resources for that kind of work. But I think that's, I feel like that's really
[Guest 2]: where maybe we're not talking about what economists are doing, but what economists
[Guest 2]: now ought to be thinking about and doing. So let's see.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, as an aside, I would say that just going back to the resources question, I think
[Amit Varma]: there are new ways of thinking about it, which will become more and more popular, like what
[Amit Varma]: Shruti does with Emergent Ventures, for example, where you just give money to someone and then
[Amit Varma]: you don't ask any questions, you just give it to them. And I really like that model where
[Amit Varma]: you identify the people you trust, who you feel will do interesting work, and then you
[Amit Varma]: don't ask any more questions after that. You trust those people to do whatever it is they
[Amit Varma]: do that works. I think that deeper kinds of crowdsourcing can also work over time, it
[Amit Varma]: just doesn't have to be either the government or institutions or even, you know, private
[Amit Varma]: companies deciding to do this, I think it can also come from a different place. And
[Amit Varma]: as far as people, you know, not voting with where the interest should lie, I would say
[Amit Varma]: a lot of that is also apathy. Like there's this beautiful saying from Kashi Kasi, which
[Amit Varma]: has almost become a cliche on the show, because I love it so much. I keep saying it.
[Guest 1]: The harmonia one.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah. Bhaar mein jaye duniya, hum bhajaye harmonia. I think that's everyone's attitude,
[Amit Varma]: man, because nobody expects anything from any government after 70 something years of
[Amit Varma]: misgovernance, basically. Now, I want to focus on a different question and go on a rant that
[Amit Varma]: might seem unrelated, but in a sense is unrelated. A couple of people on Twitter, you know, where
[Amit Varma]: we solicited questions, spoke about inequality, right? And, you know, I had written a column,
[Amit Varma]: which I linked from the show notes pointing out that, listen, inequality is a Western obsession.
[Amit Varma]: You know, it's a luxury of the elites, we need to focus on poverty, poverty and inequality
[Amit Varma]: are completely different things. And the reason people conflate the two is really zero-sum
[Amit Varma]: thinking, which is something pervasive that economists have to fight all the time, that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, if somebody is getting poorer, somebody must be getting richer, and therefore inequality
[Amit Varma]: and poverty, they go together. Now, that's not the case. Inequality and poverty often go in
[Amit Varma]: opposite directions. Like one thought experiment question I like to ask people is, in which of
[Amit Varma]: these two countries would you rather be poor, Bangladesh or the USA? And obviously, you'd
[Amit Varma]: rather be poor in the USA and the USA has far more inequality than Bangladesh does. In fact,
[Amit Varma]: countries like USA, Hong Kong, Singapore, the United Kingdom have greater inequality than Bangladesh,
[Amit Varma]: Liberia, Pakistan and Sierra Leone. But these last four countries I name have greater poverty,
[Amit Varma]: right? Now, what has happened after liberalization is we've lifted hundreds of millions of people
[Amit Varma]: out of poverty as inequality has increased. This is counterintuitive, because you would imagine that,
[Amit Varma]: you know, poverty and inequality go hand in hand. Now, I find that when many people when they talk
[Amit Varma]: about inequality, they actually mean poverty, they're thinking of the plight of poor people.
[Amit Varma]: But that's a different thing. And I think language kind of matters. Inequality per se,
[Amit Varma]: need not necessarily be a problem. I think it's a big problem in another domain, which I'll ask
[Amit Varma]: you about Rajeshwari later, because you're a macro economist, and therefore the perfect person
[Amit Varma]: for that. Now, and you know, another illustration of why inequality is not a big deal poverty is,
[Amit Varma]: is throughout history, people have moved from towns to cities, villages to towns,
[Amit Varma]: they are moving to towards a place of greater inequality, because what matters is escaping
[Amit Varma]: poverty. And the reason I say this is that the solutions for both are often opposite,
[Amit Varma]: right? And I think that there is a trade off between redistribution and growth. I think what
[Amit Varma]: you really need to do is and I agree with you that in a desperately poor country, where some 8000
[Amit Varma]: children die every day of starvation, you need certain kinds of welfare policies to alleviate
[Amit Varma]: that and NREGA is a great thing. However, I would like to live in an India where NREGA is not
[Amit Varma]: necessary, where you know, the rising tide has lifted all boats where we have greater economic
[Amit Varma]: growth. So I just want to kind of conceptually be sort of clear about this like I go by like
[Amit Varma]: Harry Frankfurt wrote a book called on inequality where he came up with this concept I love, which
[Amit Varma]: is a doctrine of sufficiency. And that guides my thinking that my thinking is guided by does
[Amit Varma]: every person have enough to live a life of sufficiency, which you can define any way you
[Amit Varma]: want, right? And I won't have a problem with whatever definition you come up with. But the
[Amit Varma]: idea is let's take everybody there, let's get out of poverty. And therefore, I find that there is
[Amit Varma]: this sort of, you know, when we conflate these two, and when you know, when we use inequality,
[Amit Varma]: when we mean poverty, and when we come up with policies that might help inequality by making
[Amit Varma]: everybody equally poor, you know, that becomes an issue. So when we talk of welfare and redistribution,
[Amit Varma]: I get it at one level, but I also feel disturbed at another level. Because the point is, for
[Amit Varma]: example, has become the regal now for all politicians in every election to say to the
[Amit Varma]: people farm loan waivers. Now, farm loan waivers to me might be a necessary anesthetic at a moment
[Amit Varma]: in time. But you are shifting the focus from the larger greater structural problems you need to
[Guest 2]: resolve. I don't even think that a farm waiver is welfare policy. Because if you mean there are
[Guest 2]: countries, Amit, where they have taught very well about what their welfare state's architecture
[Guest 2]: ought to be like. China is one of them. Brazil is one of them. We can learn a lot from these
[Guest 2]: countries. They have very different instruments, they use co-financed models of welfare. So there's
[Guest 2]: social insurance as one example, in combination with certain things, which are universal transfers.
[Guest 2]: We just, and I think this goes back to that point that I had made, I mean, if there's one sort of
[Guest 2]: dream reform in my mind, it is a very clear articulation fiscally, as well as between
[Guest 2]: center state relations on what is the welfare architecture of India. Are you going to continue
[Guest 2]: to have 464 schemes? Or do you want to learn from an Indonesia and maybe say, well, we'll have 10
[Guest 2]: big national schemes, NREGA and PDS, one of them. PMJ is one of them, PM Kisan is one, I'm just
[Guest 2]: throwing that out. And maybe the rest we do as untied grants to states and let states then decide.
[Guest 2]: And then that sort of harmoniously manages some of the center state politics as well.
[Guest 2]: There are ways to do this. Again, one looks at the energy and enthusiasm. So to me, Amit, I think
[Guest 2]: what I think we should retire is this idea that there is this conflict between welfare redistribution
[Guest 2]: and certain growth dividends when it comes to more productive assets and public goods provision.
[Guest 2]: Actually, there are studies coming out of, be it sub-Saharan Africa, be it Latin America,
[Guest 2]: which show that if you do both carefully and together, they work very well. They're mutually
[Guest 2]: reinforcing because if you give people a basic level of cash, for example, there is psychological
[Guest 2]: assurance that you can take on risks in your businesses. You can take on risks in the jobs
[Guest 2]: that you'll do. You can invest in education. They're both mutually reinforcing paradigms.
[Guest 2]: But the question is, you need a policy articulation on what the balance between the two is.
[Guest 2]: I think it's the Finance Commission, actually, where this needs to be articulated.
[Guest 2]: They've done it quite well when it comes to disaster response funds. There's a very clear
[Guest 2]: articulation of how that will be done. It worked quite well during the pandemic because state
[Guest 2]: disaster response funds were being used to actually respond to local crises, because local
[Guest 2]: crises are going to be very different. The national government can't manage it. We need to think very
[Guest 2]: carefully similarly around the welfare question. So I don't disagree with, I think, in fact, what
[Guest 2]: your concern is. I share that concern. But to me, I think what I think we should not think of is that
[Guest 2]: the two are in conflict. I think there has to be a very clear policy path, much like in other
[Guest 2]: countries where they are not in conflict and they're cyclical. Because what is NREGA? NREGA
[Guest 2]: is not an anti-poverty program. I mean, people think it's that. It's actually a shock responsive
[Guest 2]: safety net. So if you're in the middle of a shock, if you're dealing with something, you respond.
[Guest 2]: We can argue whether it actually responds in some places and it doesn't in others based on
[Guest 2]: local capacity. But I think you need to think very carefully about what are the different
[Guest 2]: instruments of welfare you're putting in. It has to be a balance. You know, often, and now I realize
[Guest 2]: I'm going into a rant on welfare policy and I will try and be brief, but there are three
[Guest 2]: instruments of welfare. One is what we call protective measures, which is after you have
[Guest 2]: fallen into poverty, it protects the poor, right, that you won't fall further below in your income.
[Guest 2]: So it's almost exposed. There are preventive measures, which tend to be much more co-financed
[Guest 2]: because essentially you use your money now to save for a crisis in the future, so social insurance.
[Guest 2]: And there are promotional measures, so that's skill training, livelihoods programs, all these kinds of
[Guest 2]: things. If you look at countries that have a healthy fiscal balance, right, of welfare, they use the
[Guest 2]: three based on what the local economy looks like. So, you know, context where they are relying much
[Guest 2]: more on agriculture, very susceptible to drought. You'll see, you know, crop insurance mixed with
[Guest 2]: food rations within NREGA, right, like some example like that. India actually has, you know, the great
[Guest 2]: privilege of having all these different contexts because right now we have a welfare context where
[Guest 2]: you have the same welfare programs running in urban, well, Maharashtra as well as Delhi.
[Guest 2]: That makes no sense because actually even the amount of transfers that you need to give people
[Guest 2]: are very different based on local consumption baskets, local minimum wage. We have no policy
[Guest 2]: articulation right now on how to tackle this balance. And I think to me it's going to be one
[Guest 2]: of the most important questions as economists, politicians, anyone in the sort of technocratic
[Guest 2]: welfare domain space. Right now I know we're in this political moment where everybody wants deeper
[Guest 2]: transfers and support because there are some communities that are hurting. But I actually
[Guest 2]: think the really important question is to think about how do we move from just thinking of it as
[Guest 2]: just transfers to thinking of it as a policy path which is fiscally sustainable so that those
[Guest 2]: conflicts can be ironed out a bit. Or you have platforms just like GST, you have platforms which
[Guest 2]: are center state which can organize then if there are conflicts which might happen. I think that's
[Guest 1]: really the need of the hour. I think one thing that I completely agree with, Amit, is that I
[Guest 1]: think poverty is a bigger problem than inequality. And I think when we focus too much on inequality
[Guest 1]: then we are trying to solve a problem using policy actions and measures which may not necessarily
[Guest 1]: address inequality and it creates a lot of other distortions in the process. And I think there's
[Guest 1]: unambiguous evidence from the history of economic growth so to speak that the one thing that really
[Guest 1]: works in terms of uplifting people from poverty and improving their living standards is growth.
[Guest 1]: And there are, for example, my favorite examples of four countries which have made the transition
[Guest 1]: from a developing country status to an OECD developed country status which is Israel,
[Guest 1]: Chile, South Korea, and Taiwan. And none of them did this using purely a redistributive model of
[Guest 1]: development so to speak. I mean they exclusively focused on growth promoting measures which was
[Guest 1]: supported by the governments and that is what helped them to make the transitions. I think
[Guest 1]: there is no running away from the fact that the most important thing we need to be focusing on
[Guest 1]: is growth and that is what's going to help over a period of time to alleviate poverty which is
[Guest 1]: what has happened over the last several decades barring the last few years when even growth itself
[Guest 1]: has stalled in India. And I think by focusing too much on inequality and there is a trade-off.
[Guest 1]: The trade-off is because the fiscal resources of the government are finite and the reason they are
[Guest 1]: also finite is because once you are struggling on growth you're automatically your tax to GDP
[Guest 1]: ratio which is what the measure of fiscal prowess of the government is that gets compromised right.
[Guest 1]: If you're not able to sort of increase the tax base then you are limited to a certain finite
[Guest 1]: amount of tax to GDP and if you're not able to enlarge it then you're sort of trying to choose
[Guest 1]: between I have 100 rupees what do I allocate this 100 rupees to. I have to do this 460 for
[Guest 1]: welfare schemes. I have to do public good provision. I also have to do other things
[Guest 1]: and I think the Indian state is really very badly stretched out in thousands of directions right. I
[Guest 1]: mean they are trying to do some rudimentary provision of public good and struggling at that.
[Guest 1]: They're trying to do welfare schemes they're struggling at that and they are doing many
[Guest 1]: other things that they should not be doing and of course struggling at that right. So you have
[Guest 1]: this really finite limited fiscal resources which are being pulled at from multiple angles and then
[Guest 1]: you're choosing that what fire am I going to put out and what battle am I going to fight and what's
[Guest 1]: going to give me the highest returns in terms of let's say winning elections and staying in power.
[Guest 1]: And in the process what definitely gets compromised is growth because the state is doing
[Guest 1]: a thousand things which are inimical to growth in the country and they need to figure out that okay
[Guest 1]: let's take a step back from all of these things and let growth take its course and yes when there
[Guest 1]: are rare events when there are catastrophic events we need to have the budget to spend at that point
[Guest 1]: of time which is what the government was not able to do this time because for years you've just been
[Guest 1]: on a spending spree and when the time comes for you to actually provide the stimulus and the
[Guest 1]: support needed you're suddenly worried about fiscal deficit and debt. So the entire thinking
[Guest 1]: about how do you support the economy in bad times how do you sort of step back and build a surplus
[Guest 1]: during good times and how do you step away from this interfering into the growth which should be
[Guest 1]: the job of the private sector that entire thinking has gone haywire and I think to a large extent
[Guest 1]: we tend to obsess about inequality right and what inequality does I think it normalizes envy
[Guest 1]: right I mean there is this thing that okay if the rich are getting richer we should be envious
[Guest 1]: of that and that's just a very suboptimal outcome so to speak so for example when I teach my child
[Guest 1]: or the values that I want to inculcate I don't want to tell her that be envious of the other
[Guest 1]: kids in the building or the school I want to tell her that look at your own life in absolute terms
[Guest 1]: build your own character and do the things that's going to make you happy irrespective of whether
[Guest 1]: what the other person next to you is doing but therefore I think inequality it's the state of
[Guest 1]: the nature there's inequality everywhere and I think at some point we just have to stop obsessing
[Guest 1]: about the fact that economic policy actions should be catered towards addressing inequality we should
[Guest 1]: focus on growth and and that is going to lead to the alleviation of poverty one thing that I do
[Guest 1]: want to focus on here is I think there should be qualitative opportunities so more than income
[Guest 1]: inequality or wealth inequality etc it's the qualitative opportunities that probably should
[Guest 1]: receive a lot more focus on discussion and that is where again we fail because the state is being
[Guest 2]: squeezed into multiple directions yeah I just want to say a couple of things one I want to just
[Guest 2]: push on this idea I don't think there is a growth versus distribution a redistribution trade-off I
[Guest 2]: know this is something in a very traditional sense in economics I think we're taught this
[Guest 2]: taught this but actually there's a lot of work that's coming out of and I'm particularly thinking
[Guest 2]: of poor economics is about this right I mean there's an entire section of thinking about
[Guest 2]: very careful rigorous experiments which show assets plus counseling short-term transfers
[Guest 2]: lead to businesses that grow which then there are long-run spillover effects on the local economy
[Guest 2]: right so I do want to sort of push this idea that you know one of the big reasons why there's this
[Guest 2]: whole conversation on the basic income for example is this idea that in a precarious labor market you
[Guest 2]: want some minimum assurance for everyone so that everyone has the access to one fairly large part
[Guest 2]: of a significant transfer in India it may not need to go to everybody you could say it goes to say
[Guest 2]: 80 percent of the informal economy for example and then at least with that assurance you're able to
[Guest 2]: as we say partake in risk-taking behavior all kinds of you know economic goods which are good
[Guest 2]: for growth I don't necessarily see them in conflict if there is a very clear coherent policy in place
[Guest 2]: around social protection which I would agree right now doesn't exist in India I think the two can be
[Amit Varma]: consonant and they can be enforcing I think if I can sort of push back on the pushback I would
[Amit Varma]: sort of say that one I agree that in theory they may not be as much of a dichotomy as it may seem
[Amit Varma]: that you can have what you as you described it a policy path where you can have a some welfare
[Amit Varma]: policies happening and also growth happening however what happens in practice and what
[Amit Varma]: happens in the political mindset and what happened you know what happens when it comes to scarce
[Amit Varma]: resources as Rajeshwari said is that there inevitably is a dichotomy in the sense that
[Amit Varma]: you will always privilege welfare policies more number one because they're much easier to sell
[Amit Varma]: it's much easier to tell a voter that I'm giving you something as opposed to telling him that I'm
[Amit Varma]: going to do a structural reform which will pay off in 10 years and blah blah blah so in political
[Amit Varma]: sense all your incentives are towards just going for the welfare schemes whether you call them
[Amit Varma]: handouts or freebies or whatever you're giving something directly and also that then becomes a
[Amit Varma]: cop-out that then becomes a way for you to say that I have done everything I could and it becomes
[Amit Varma]: a race to the bottom as it has with farm loan waivers and you use it to not address any of the
[Amit Varma]: core problems the way I look at it as this is that let's say I have a terrible backache at my lower
[Amit Varma]: back right the immediate thing is to give me an anesthetic to give me a crocene or if it's more
[Amit Varma]: severe to give me a good painkiller and that then you know relieves me of that pain but the point is
[Amit Varma]: you're not actually treating the disease what if I have pancreatic cancer which you know a lower
[Amit Varma]: back pain is one of the signs of you know you're not creating or treating the disease and you're
[Amit Varma]: also saying that oh I gave you something you know your pain is better I'm doing my job so that's
[Amit Varma]: really my worry there which is not to argue for one or the other what I would say is that I'm
[Amit Varma]: completely okay my worry is that we just think of welfarism all the time even this current
[Amit Varma]: dispensation has realized that they can rely on well-delivered welfarism to take their eyes off
[Amit Varma]: the broader ball where they can do nonsense like demonetization and the botched up GST and so on
[Guest 1]: and no one holds them accountable as Rajeshwari pointed out. So two points I'll make and over to
[Guest 1]: you then Shaina so one is that I think you know theoretically it makes sense to say that we'll do
[Guest 1]: a basic income scheme where we only target the most deserving and the needy people or let's say
[Guest 1]: x percentage of the population but I think to execute something like that requires an enormous
[Guest 1]: level of sophisticated state capacity where you identify who the exact recipients who are deserving
[Guest 1]: are going to receive it then ensure that there's not going to be any leakage so I think that I
[Guest 1]: don't think we even have anywhere remotely that kind of state capacity and I think what happens
[Guest 1]: is once you have 460 for welfare schemes it's very difficult to withdraw any scheme because
[Guest 1]: all the incentive is then to is to pile on more and more schemes rather than withdraw anything
[Guest 1]: clean up the system and just say that we are only going to stick to one scheme because fiscally we
[Guest 1]: are constrained I don't think that ever happens in reality and lastly I think what this government
[Guest 1]: has done is that I think they've cleaned up the last mile delivery much better than the previous
[Guest 1]: government so I think while there are still leakages but the last mile delivery has significantly
[Guest 1]: become better and that again goes going back to my original point that is where the accountability
[Guest 1]: system becomes even more problematic because if I'm actually getting the delivery of the welfare
[Guest 1]: schemes better than what I used to before in my mind this government is doing better than
[Guest 1]: the previous government right and therefore what am I going to really hold this government
[Guest 1]: accountable for so and and lastly I think the countries which have which have a welfarist
[Guest 1]: social state with the successful redistributive policy are also the ones which have very high
[Guest 1]: levels of GDP and per capita income because that generates the fiscal resources that you would need
[Guest 1]: in order to continue and sustain an efficient redistribution program and also you have social
[Guest 1]: spending on health care and education I mean look at Indian government the pandemic exposed it
[Guest 1]: less than two percent of the GDP is being spent on the health care but you have a whole lot of
[Guest 1]: welfare schemes but that's the palliative that Amit was mentioning about okay a couple of things
[Guest 2]: one India spends about two percent of GDP on all of its welfare schemes so again this goes back to
[Guest 2]: fact I think we keep thinking that in fact in our mind I think we think the Indian government spends
[Guest 2]: much more on welfare than it actually does so that's the first thing and I think for those
[Guest 2]: who are interested in the breakdown on this we have the World Bank and the IMF have a series
[Guest 2]: of reports I've authored some of them looking at budgets so I think it's not the case in fact
[Guest 2]: we're spending health and education certainly you could spend more but it's not that there's a
[Guest 2]: trade-off between spending more on education spending on welfare because that's not happening
[Guest 2]: never has happened in our politics number one number two I think on the question of targeting
[Guest 2]: actually I mean I work on targeting in fact the public distribution system and when the pandemic
[Guest 2]: hit PMGKY showed you have the Jan Dhan Yojana you have the public distribution system they are near
[Guest 2]: universal we have a paper for those who are interested it's called from intent to implementation
[Guest 2]: it uses CMI data to track what happened with PMGKY transfers and what we essentially find is not just
[Guest 2]: us there are others who've done surveys and what we find is the PDS distribution system actually in
[Guest 2]: terms of identifying targeting is extremely effective because it's universal and it's
[Guest 2]: constantly being used and one of the things that people like Rajesh Bansal who used to be in fact
[Guest 2]: briefly at the RBI was with the DBT mission essentially wrote a paper saying why don't we
[Guest 2]: create a who to pay database using the PDS so actually to your point about targeting and basic
[Guest 2]: income in fact now in policy conversations that I am part of one constantly hears the lament that
[Guest 2]: this is so easy to do and it would also then put a squeeze on the remaining 464 why don't we start
[Guest 2]: to move in that direction and some states have so Tamil Nadu for instance is using the PDS to
[Guest 2]: essentially do an income transfer there are other states that are going to start to move in that
[Guest 2]: direction so actually I think that the execution of at least some of the basic income stuff is
[Amit Varma]: much more doable so I'm really glad we are all agreed on one thing one what a relief it is that
[Amit Varma]: that damn drilling noise has stopped I'm sorry dear listeners what happened was that suddenly
[Amit Varma]: unexpectedly and this never happens there was some drilling at an apartment upstairs or downstairs
[Amit Varma]: which you heard so I went to the two flats upstairs the two flats above that then the two
[Amit Varma]: flats below me and finally two floors below me there were people who were drilling and they
[Amit Varma]: kindly offered to stop drilling they did not understand recording so I had to tell them I'm
[Amit Varma]: live with BBC to London and I'm going to lose a lot of money please I really did say that and
[Amit Varma]: then we kind of managed to sort of make them stop the drilling so I hope this episode is worth it
[Amit Varma]: now yeah so I mean the lot of thought-provoking stuff on welfare and growth to think about and
[Amit Varma]: what I'm glad about is at the fundamental level we are on the same page growth is important there's
[Amit Varma]: no getting away from it and in the short term you know if you can alleviate the pain of people
[Amit Varma]: that's a good thing and it must be done unfortunately this is often seen in dichotomous
[Amit Varma]: terms and my worry is that it ends up being a dichotomy in the political level but leave that
[Amit Varma]: aside I want to actually now you know before we go to the break and we begin with and after that
[Amit Varma]: we'll talk about your life Rajeshwari you are not getting away from that but before that I want to
[Amit Varma]: bring up one of the twitter questions because I think it leads us to an interesting area that
[Amit Varma]: both of you alluded to and a couple of questions Raghuram Janak asks where did we in brackets India
[Amit Varma]: go wrong economically in the last eight years and what should be the key area of focus going forward
[Amit Varma]: that's Raghuram Janak and Jordan Khosrow which is a delightful name by the way though on twitter
[Amit Varma]: you never know if it's the real name it you know no one on the internet knows I'm a dog you've
[Amit Varma]: seen that old cartoon I think it's a new yorker cartoon yeah no but we're not calling Jordan a
[Amit Varma]: dog I'm just saying it's a nice name and he asked when did India's economic decline start was it
[Amit Varma]: during Mughals or during British Raj or earlier than that stop quote and I'll attempt a brief
[Amit Varma]: answer to that and saying that no you don't need to go so far back the truth is that our economic
[Amit Varma]: governance has been miserable for most of our history there was a golden 20-year period from
[Amit Varma]: 1991 to 2011 when things were looking up and were moving in the right direction and for the last
[Amit Varma]: 10 11 years or so it's been a disaster I've got an episode with Pooja Mehra called the lost decade
[Amit Varma]: um on her book about you know how all of this happened she takes you into the weeds and you
[Amit Varma]: get to learn exactly in terms of policy what went wrong and it started going wrong before this
[Amit Varma]: particular dispension and this particular dispension of course made it much worse for
[Amit Varma]: reasons Rajeshwari mentioned like demonetization the boss GST and so on and I've also done an
[Amit Varma]: episode on the 1991 reforms about why we did have that 20 year old golden period and you know in
[Amit Varma]: in terms of specific policies and how our way of thinking changed you know and and the point that
[Amit Varma]: I want to underscore here is that a number of the questions are also talking about how right-wing
[Amit Varma]: economists have gone wrong and I feel that this is people conflate Modi's economic policies with
[Amit Varma]: right-wing just because socially it's called right-wing I think the spectrum of left and
[Amit Varma]: right in India doesn't really work but if you really look at it all of India's economics except
[Amit Varma]: for parts of the 20-year period have been statist and therefore left-wing in a sense markets haven't
[Amit Varma]: been allowed to play I had the congress politician Salman soz on the show and Salman said that in
[Amit Varma]: 2014 when Modi won he was actually optimistic because of the noises Modi had made about freeing
[Amit Varma]: up markets and getting away from statism Modi did nothing of that he doubled down on policies of
[Amit Varma]: the past he showed the top-down central planning of Nehru he showed the authoritarian streak of
[Amit Varma]: Indira if anything the ruthlessness of Sanjay Gandhi even and so on and so forth which is why
[Amit Varma]: we are in this mess so this perception that some people have that oh you know left-wing versus
[Amit Varma]: right-wing in economics it's all fundamentally statist and there is no freedom at all in fact
[Amit Varma]: all our parties are left on economics and right on social issues as Arun Shourie famously said
[Amit Varma]: you know a UPA is equal to NDA plus cow and of course these days I think what we sort of
[Amit Varma]: need to worry about is a cow aspect of it of how our society is torn apart and there was
[Amit Varma]: another question from twitter from a gentleman named Rohit Ripati saying how long can economists
[Amit Varma]: ignore the coming apart of the social fabric it's a serious question and to this I just want to say
[Amit Varma]: that hey economists are not ignoring any coming apart of the social fabric economists are people
[Amit Varma]: just like people are and every economist I know is you know aghast at it and there's another
[Amit Varma]: question which this is a good time to address where someone I won't name because I'm going to
[Amit Varma]: diss the question I asked about you know what question should I ask you guys and this person
[Amit Varma]: said quote ask them what they were doing in the Neeti Aayog when this government ran down the
[Amit Varma]: economy into pieces ask why did they whitewash Modi stop good why did you guys whitewash Modi
[Amit Varma]: I have absolutely no idea what you're talking about at this point of time I think this
[Amit Varma]: particular gentleman just saw the word economist and got enraged and triggered by that and went
[Amit Varma]: off into this rant and the truth is that I actually have a filter for who I allow on the
[Amit Varma]: show and one of my litmus tests is that if you supported demonetization you are never coming
[Amit Varma]: on the show right I made one quasi exception for Arvind Subramaniam and I asked him all the tough
[Amit Varma]: questions so if anyone feels that I don't ask stuff don't get those people on and and we had
[Amit Varma]: a very civil conversation but I asked all the tough questions including about demon I think
[Guest 1]: there is a huge amount of simplification that's happening here right I mean the word economist
[Guest 1]: is getting conflated with there's just this one kind of an entity who works for the government
[Guest 1]: in a government thing that supports all the policies that's coming out of the PMO or the
[Guest 1]: MOF and not protesting all the bad things that's happening there's some kind of a non-existent
[Amit Varma]: entity that's in the minds of people no I remember at the time of demon I wrote this
[Amit Varma]: strong editorial about useful idiots Lenin's phrase not literally calling people's idiots
[Amit Varma]: where I said any economist who support demonetization is either a bad economist or a
[Amit Varma]: bad human being and I kind of stand by that and every economist I would lean more towards the
[Amit Varma]: latter more towards yeah me too exactly exactly I completely agree because all the examples who
[Guest 1]: come to my mind are bad human beings to begin with demonetization was an event that almost split the
[Guest 1]: world into there are two kinds of people right I mean those who support those who don't absolutely
[Guest 1]: it became crystal clear and since then it has just been a slippery slope no and also I think
[Amit Varma]: you know what I mean I don't know if one should be held culpable for it but there's also a failure
[Amit Varma]: on the part of economists like most the majority of economists basically almost all economists
[Amit Varma]: opposed it because it is batshit crazy as my friend southern and who misses yes it's batshit
[Amit Varma]: yes right and yet there is a public perception that oh the economist supported Modiji all of
[Guest 2]: which are completely untrue yeah and you know but I'll tell you something and I wrote a piece
[Guest 2]: in fact at the end of last year about this so I go to a lot of Delhi parties right and this I
[Guest 2]: think goes back to this gentleman who was so enraged with the use of the phrase economist
[Guest 2]: I go to a lot of Delhi parties and this was a new year's thing and I'd been and I was generally
[Guest 2]: talking to someone and because as we know I'm a nerd I have really nothing else to talk to people
[Guest 2]: about other than the economy and numbers right I have really nothing else and so I was talking to
[Guest 2]: some gentlemen in their 50s who for some reason all of them have a crush on Milind Soman I want
[Guest 2]: everyone to know this gentleman in his 50s Amit Rajeshwari let me tell you in north India now
[Guest 2]: amongst the elite gents this is something I believe men in their 50s they all want to be
[Guest 2]: as fit as Milind Soman is now that he is in his 50s and I think they also aspire to like all his
[Guest 2]: triathlete abilities and all of that it's a good thing to aspire to I suppose I suppose even I
[Guest 2]: would like to look like Milind Soman I know it's kind of not possible okay I mean I have other
[Guest 2]: thoughts which I will keep to myself for the time being but the point being I remember I started
[Guest 2]: someone asked me what I did and I mentioned that I am an economist at the world bank immediately
[Guest 2]: there was this sniggering cynicism and they said oh but you're and they said this in Hindi in almost
[Guest 2]: half the Punjabi they said but you're an economist what will you know about the economy and that is
[Guest 2]: I think the current rep of the community and I completely agree with Rajeshwari I think it is a
[Guest 2]: it's a strange kind of morphing of who you think an economist is but the other thing that makes it
[Guest 2]: really complicated is that these were gentlemen who are all running businesses and they felt and
[Guest 2]: this I think goes back to also the point that Amit was making about how much we make economics
[Guest 2]: accessible in the way people think about the world all these guys seem to believe that they had the
[Guest 2]: pulse on the real economy because they hired people they were fighting with their workers
[Guest 2]: they were producing things and they said we know and what do you know and I think there is this
[Guest 2]: competition now we do live in this post-truth world there are competitions about who gets to
[Guest 2]: assert what fact and how facts are constructed and I think honestly when I was sitting there
[Guest 2]: I mean at this particular social gathering I realized it's very difficult because what I can
[Guest 2]: now share with them they will just dismiss as technicalese you know this is just don't bore
[Guest 1]: me with this stuff also I wonder to what extent social media has a role to play here right the
[Guest 1]: kind of economists who are vocal on social media are probably of a very different type believing
[Guest 1]: in some things as wanting to support the government wanting to come across as I don't want to criticize
[Guest 1]: the government for anything for whatever reason they may have in their minds and I think that's
[Guest 1]: what the people who are also on social media get to witness and read and in their mind these are
[Guest 1]: the economists who have all the power and who have all the prestige and everything and they have
[Guest 1]: access to the government and they are the ones who are messing up with the economy and they are
[Guest 1]: the so it's like a you know that is what is getting created using this social media I'm
[Guest 1]: completely guessing because I myself am not on social media see you're like I could say to you
[Amit Varma]: what the factory owner said to her that you know yeah yes I don't know the economy because I'm not
[Amit Varma]: on social media in the sense you don't know social media because you're not on social media
[Guest 1]: I mean what Shaina would not say in the party that I'm guessing here I am admitting I'm guessing
[Amit Varma]: that this could be happening in social media my senses and you're right you're right to what I'd
[Amit Varma]: add to this is that I think social media incentivizes extreme expression because and
[Amit Varma]: it's almost the opposite of what people call the median voter theorem right the median voter theorem
[Amit Varma]: basically is that in a democracy with two parties both of them will be as close to the center as
[Amit Varma]: possible they'll practically be identical in the same way that if you have an ice cream vendor on
[Amit Varma]: a beach you know he can put his cart anywhere but if there are two of them they'll both try to be as
[Amit Varma]: close to the center as possible so they have the largest whatever which is why in the US you used
[Amit Varma]: to have a situation where during the primaries people would swing to the extremes and talk to
[Amit Varma]: the core voters but during the main elections they'd be next to each other so when I look at
[Amit Varma]: 2016 for example uh you know two candidates from the different parties who were really close to
[Amit Varma]: each other in everything were Jeb Bush and Hillary Clinton and of course someone on the extremes won
[Amit Varma]: and that swing to the extreme so I think what social media also does is once you join social
[Amit Varma]: media if you get attracted to say an ideological tribe of any kind on either side if you want to
[Amit Varma]: raise your status within that tribe you know how do you do it by becoming more and more shrill
[Amit Varma]: and it's a race to the extremes like even that uh Mahasamyalan of so-called Hindu priests which we
[Amit Varma]: had you know people like Yati Narsinanand and all that you know if any of them was to individually
[Amit Varma]: give a speech anywhere I don't think they would be so rabid but by the fact that they're all
[Amit Varma]: together and they all want to stand out and in a sense are competing for the attention
[Amit Varma]: I think they were driven to even further extremes and then solidified in those positions also I
[Guest 1]: think I mean what this reflects is the overarching growing trend of polarization in the country
[Guest 1]: exactly right I mean this is if despite social media being around this was not the case pre-2014
[Guest 1]: to this extent and the growing trend of polarization has also polarized economists and
[Guest 1]: economists who are vocal on social media and I and I do read them occasionally when they're writing
[Guest 1]: their op-eds and giving speeches it's absolutely obnoxious because they know I'm hoping they know
[Guest 1]: that no economic theory logic argument would support what they're saying but they are saying
[Guest 1]: what they're saying because they have certain other motives and positions and rank in mind
[Guest 1]: and that that's the great disservice they are doing to the larger community of economists and
[Guest 1]: we are all getting confused and conflated together as we all belong to that one entity which is not
[Amit Varma]: true one minority of spineless people no I remember in fact after demonetization and
[Amit Varma]: diktat went out to all their you know people under the pay that you got to defend it in public
[Amit Varma]: so you had people defending demonetization through columns or through tv soundbites in
[Amit Varma]: ways that you know that this guy has written excellent books this guy is smart he knows this
[Guest 1]: is not true still he's talking nonsense during demonetization I was extremely vocal on tv
[Guest 1]: channels I was getting invited by prominent tv channels one of the tv channels itself got
[Guest 1]: suffered as a result I think so I was getting called in tv channels I was writing in the media
[Guest 1]: because it was a complete shock to my system the way I know of it forget economics the way I know
[Guest 1]: the country to be the way I know the people to be the very fact that nobody protested I still can't
[Guest 1]: fathom that right so I was very vocal about it but then lo and behold after a couple of months I was
[Guest 1]: indirectly told that I am voicing my opinion too much and it's coming out as too anti-establishment
[Guest 1]: and I need to tone it down so imagine I mean I am as small and trivial in the larger scheme of things
[Guest 1]: as can be if I am facing some backlash of this kind what other more prominent people would be
[Guest 1]: facing if they wanted to speak up against demon and and since then as I said it's been a slippery
[Guest 1]: slope downhill because you just can't speak up against establishment I mean I did a lot of work
[Guest 1]: against the GDP data the official GDP data but then there's backlash there as well you just
[Guest 1]: can't criticize anything that is wrong in the establishment in the polity in the policy in the
[Guest 1]: economic space and therefore the economists who are getting legitimacy who are getting the sort
[Guest 1]: of the front page whatever columns who are getting the social media voice are the ones who are towing
[Guest 1]: the party line so I think that is we are sort of getting relegated to the background and maybe to
[Guest 1]: some extent we are at fault as well I mean maybe we should grab social media we should be as vocal
[Guest 1]: as well but I know that's that's a different debate you know but one thing so my job in fact
[Guest 2]: in the the technical hat that I wear it actually involves being very behind the scenes because you
[Guest 2]: know the world bank typically will only support Indian government programs be it states so on and
[Guest 2]: so forth and what's funny is that even so I completely agree with what you know I think
[Guest 2]: both of you are saying on social media and the public part of the economic discourse but in the
[Guest 2]: private part because I see the other part even there I see so much fear um confusion as well
[Guest 2]: because now what's happened is you know I actually really do want to double down on that
[Guest 2]: one-handed economist argument because everyone just seems to have 17 things to say and you can't
[Guest 2]: land at one fact so to you know for action everyone must coalesce around a few facts
[Guest 2]: and I've realized even in private conversations and people just can't coalesce that's number one
[Guest 2]: and I see this particularly I think the higher up you go in states I actually think there's still
[Guest 2]: coalitions around facts I notice that as you start to deal with a lot of national agencies
[Guest 2]: things do start to change the other thing I notice which is actually even I think it's
[Guest 2]: something that makes me quite cautious and worried is that even if there is a coalition around facts
[Guest 2]: now there's a sense that well I mean what will happen you know there used to be the entrepreneurial
[Guest 2]: bureaucrat right earlier we all know this person like who would sort of navigate the corridors of
[Guest 2]: power would push for things what I increasingly also notice is that even that instinct right of
[Guest 2]: being rewarded it's really just you know it's really changed and I think if the private side
[Guest 2]: of it also where you're not really public facing is like this you know where is the sort of push
[Guest 2]: and the charge in the system going to come from if it has to change equilibrium so I guess I'm
[Guest 2]: sounding now as pessimistic as you Amit which is quite worrying I'm optimistic on other parts maybe
[Guest 2]: outside the government systems but I fully agree and I think the other issue where I do think that
[Guest 2]: there's a lot of enthusiasm though is I see for example you know there are these young people
[Guest 2]: often I notice who are very active on social media I mean I'm thinking of a Rhodes scholar or
[Guest 2]: there are these you know they're just putting out facts and they're calling out nonsense and
[Guest 2]: it's actually quite wonderful to see so I think while I fully agree with I think what Rajeshwari
[Guest 2]: is saying I also think almost the antidote to that is probably going to come from some of these more
[Guest 2]: the flatter platforms right because even in private in government I just don't see the
[Guest 2]: I don't see slack in the system I think everyone is either too cynical or perhaps too
[Guest 2]: concerned about just what's the point in pushing for action when nothing will happen
[Guest 2]: and I actually think it's going to be a lot of sort of younger students who are perhaps now
[Guest 2]: much more you know creating their own spaces where I think a lot of the real creative energies or
[Guest 1]: like the push for change might come from. So in fact I'll say that on this point I mean something
[Guest 1]: as fundamental as has the economy recovered from the pandemic right it is at the top of all our
[Guest 1]: minds economists non-economists everybody wants to know this but there is no consensus on something
[Guest 1]: that should be based on data where all the data majority of it should speak in the same direction
[Guest 1]: I mean if you think about the 2010 onward slowdown at least by now there is a consensus which
[Guest 1]: many of us have to really struggle to establish a consensus that you know since 2010 the economy
[Guest 1]: has indeed been slowing down and it took us 10 years Pooja wrote an amazing book Ajay Shah Vijay
[Guest 1]: Kelkar wrote the book and it took us a long time to tell people yes the economy was in doldrums
[Guest 1]: the economy was in a bad shape now as we're living through it has the economy recovered
[Guest 1]: from the pandemic or not it should not be a very difficult question to answer when you have access
[Guest 1]: to multiple data series much more than we had in 60s and 70s where the only data where we would
[Guest 1]: look at is GDP today you have a thousand series that you can look at and you can construct a
[Guest 1]: story what is the factual story what's the fact but we can't seem to arrive at a consensus even
[Guest 1]: on that because there the government agencies are spinning a completely different story
[Guest 1]: their version of the reality is that everything is going hunky-dory we are back to where we were
[Guest 1]: the recovery is going full on and we are on track to become that whatever five trillion dollar
[Guest 1]: whatever the the number is right but then when you look at the data when you analyze it as
[Guest 1]: economists you see that that is not the case i mean the economy is really struggling there are
[Guest 1]: multiple pockets of worry and we can talk about it if we want to but why is there such lack of
[Guest 1]: transparency on the behalf of the government agencies who are most responsible for putting
[Guest 1]: up the truth in front of the common people so it's almost like you're putting a facade in front
[Guest 1]: of their eyes you want to drink a different kool-aid and you want to convince them with a
[Guest 1]: different narrative and therefore you're going to pursue a policy also that is suitable to that
[Guest 1]: when you've gotten the very basics of it wrong and therefore everything that follows after that
[Guest 2]: is also wrong and can i just add i mean one of the biggest challenges is that we just don't
[Guest 2]: even data i mean we still don't we don't know what our poverty rate is we you know we were
[Guest 2]: talking about poverty and inequality the nss and must be which used to put out churn out information
[Guest 2]: we just haven't had a consumption round i don't even know what's happening with the census to be
[Guest 2]: honest i i believe it was supposed to happen then now it's again there are questions and some of
[Guest 2]: these core institutions that were supposed to generate basic facts around the world of the world
[Guest 2]: we are just not seeing those being published and to me honestly i was on a panel recently
[Guest 2]: discussing how to better feminize data this wonderful economist i was on the panel with
[Guest 2]: she actually turned at the end we were talking and she said you know all these very exciting
[Guest 2]: ideas of like making women's voices more representative in data that's all very nice
[Guest 2]: but right now we just need the data we just need any basic even if it's masculine data
[Guest 2]: give us something and i think especially for those who work in the social sectors and so on
[Guest 2]: it's even more worrying because you know nfhs is not fully complete uh there are questions about
[Guest 2]: you know what is the sampling rounds and we these are things actually that again not rocket science
[Guest 2]: these are things that you know these are institutions that are used to it but to me in
[Guest 2]: fact the most fundamental anyone asks me anything about what to do with the about the economy not
[Guest 2]: that lots of people ask me but when people do ask me the one thing i actually says just get
[Guest 2]: just some core fundamental data just needs to be published because we are just right now flying
[Guest 2]: blind so i completely want to double down on what rajeshwari said along with publish the data
[Amit Varma]: couple of questions here and one is of course i have discussed data with every economist on
[Amit Varma]: the show including both of you in the different episodes we've done and we know why it's a problem
[Amit Varma]: and i'll just be pessimistic and say that the fact that so many government institutions for example
[Amit Varma]: are not forthcoming with data is not going to change and the answer for that is a classic
[Amit Varma]: economist answer of incentives right it's not going to change it is the way it is so the the
[Amit Varma]: two related questions i have are one how do you cope without it what are the kind of proxies that
[Amit Varma]: you use and the second one which is almost the same question but slightly different is that if
[Amit Varma]: someone listening to the show or a citizen like me just wants to know that how do i know how are
[Amit Varma]: things right because you have an informal sector which you know is not measured directly you try
[Amit Varma]: to figure out other ways of trying to you know come at how it's doing that we know it's been
[Amit Varma]: demolished by demonetization gst covet all of these things coming together so you know
[Amit Varma]: you know and like like you know shrena you spoke about the business when you're meeting
[Amit Varma]: who are running factories so they think everything is fine they're seeing one part of the elephant
[Amit Varma]: you might see another part of the elephant rajeshwari might see another part of the elephant
[Amit Varma]: uh given my current girth all of you are looking at me so the the you know i gotta i'll take a
[Guest 1]: digression not because you're speaking we were looking at you no no it's what he's he's sensitive
[Amit Varma]: about now so i'll i'll i'll tell you a joke over here i read this lovely tweet by someone i've
[Amit Varma]: forgotten who i'll try and find it and link it but the tweet basically is something to the effect of
[Amit Varma]: i fell into the river and i drowned and when they pulled my body up the person who pulled it up and
[Amit Varma]: said look it's so bloated and grotesque and the person next to him said oh he fell in just a minute
[Amit Varma]: ago so yeah so that's my self-deprecating joke i think after the economy we need to talk about
[Guest 2]: self-love i just have one thing to offer on data there are lots of issues with cmi but i am so
[Guest 2]: grateful that cmi exists let's take a minute to just you know celebrate that because had it not
[Guest 2]: been for that i at least in our work my day-to-day work we've partnered with cmi the world bank now
[Guest 2]: actually finances some core modules around social protection safety nets some questions on health
[Guest 2]: we are using all of that to just understand what's happening at least in our area of work
[Guest 2]: so i'm very grateful and yes i know that there are challenges and those are things that can
[Guest 2]: be tested expanded so on and so forth that's very helpful and i think for anyone at least in my
[Guest 2]: domain anyone interested in trying to understand what's happening to welfare what's happening to
[Guest 2]: social policy i find in particular azim premji university keeps now almost an aggregated database
[Guest 2]: and one they come out with this fabulous report which i think everyone should see it's the state
[Guest 2]: of you know what is happening to the labor market they produce it now every year which is just
[Guest 2]: wonderful and they use a combination of data sources i find that very useful and the second
[Guest 2]: is they actually now aggregate information and they keep it so for anyone who wants to know
[Guest 2]: what's happening from very different organizations i find that that now is often almost the beginning
[Guest 2]: point and then you can sort of follow through so i i think i had those two but i i do want to say
[Guest 2]: that even with all of this we've had government data forever and ever and they've always been
[Guest 2]: incentives to hide that data but it was published and it is really a shame that that is not happening
[Guest 1]: anymore so so i have a few points to add one is that i completely agree with shan and what you
[Guest 1]: said is that the one serious damage that has happened over the last decade or so is that the
[Guest 1]: trust in data is gone right and once again when we say data here people are not making the
[Guest 1]: distinction between official private government to them the trust in data is gone and so if you're
[Guest 1]: quoting some numbers and telling me this is what is happening how do i even know that i can trust
[Guest 1]: those numbers and that is it's like at the core and heart of economics as a social science
[Guest 1]: you can't even trust the numbers what are you going to talk about analyzing the numbers and
[Guest 1]: coming up with interpretations right and this i completely agree what what shan also said is that
[Guest 1]: earlier the situation i mean we've always had state capacity problems even in data collection
[Guest 1]: and data generation but it was never as dire as it is today because we never had a situation of
[Guest 1]: suppression of official data and the moment the government starts suppressing data you obviously
[Guest 1]: start feeling very alerted that what exactly is going on in the economy how bad is the situation
[Guest 1]: that the government feels the need to suppress something as big as a consumption survey result
[Guest 1]: right so and on what has happened over the last five six years is that despite repeated criticisms
[Guest 1]: writing uh we have all talked about it in public forums written about it done research on it
[Guest 1]: beat the gdp data beat the consumption data employment unemployment survey there has been no
[Guest 1]: addressing from the side of the government there has been no acknowledgement that is there is a
[Guest 1]: problem and we're looking into it right or there has been no steps taken by the statistical
[Guest 1]: organization of the country that okay yes we are going to do abc in order to address some
[Guest 1]: of these problems and because it has been a one-sided criticism sort of we are lamenting
[Guest 1]: and we are complaining and we are criticizing with nothing coming from the other side
[Guest 1]: i think at some point people just give up and say fine we can't just use the official data anymore
[Guest 1]: because but but but what i feel a little bit sad about is that we we know that the gdp data for
[Guest 1]: example has problems but we still continue to look at the gdp data to understand how the economy is
[Guest 1]: doing right because the nso etc have not taken any steps to address the problems people have
[Guest 1]: sort of forgotten about it right it's like the memory is very short short-lived and now we have
[Guest 1]: normalized the problems and we have internalized it and we are going forward with it which is quite
[Guest 1]: problematic because that legitimizes all the problems that exist in the series still for
[Guest 1]: example when i tell my students to do research explicitly tell them you can't use gdp as a
[Guest 1]: continuous time series for 50 years there is a break in between but how many people are really
[Guest 1]: going to be doing that so therefore the conclusions that you're getting could be erroneous at
[Guest 1]: different levels but that is just one official series on multiple other series what happens is
[Guest 1]: when you can't trust one big official data as i said that gets influenced into all the other
[Guest 1]: series which number can you trust which you cannot i for example have a hard time trusting any
[Guest 1]: official data and which is very bad for a macroeconomist because for macro you have to use
[Guest 1]: official data so what i end up doing is i have started looking a lot to my micro data and micro
[Guest 1]: data coming from private sources of course one huge source of data is center for monitoring in
[Guest 1]: an economy the cmi has done massive public service by collecting all the data at a firm level at the
[Guest 1]: firm level at the household's level the only problem is it's not going to be accessible to
[Guest 1]: the common person because it is expensive right it's subscription based you can't subscribe to a
[Guest 1]: cmi data just like that so i think there it probably the responsibility lies with economists
[Guest 1]: like us who can access the data to make it accessible to the common person in whichever
[Guest 1]: form and shape we can so i think looking at micro data is the way to go you can't look at macro
[Guest 1]: official level data anymore and look at a large number of disaggregated series so for example i
[Guest 1]: would look at two-wheeler sales i would look at auto sales right all of these data coming from
[Guest 1]: so even if they're coming from different ministries and different departments at least there i have
[Guest 1]: the hope that not everything in disaggregated level is messed up right so you look at a bunch
[Guest 1]: of disaggregated series and you try to piece a story together and you sort of back it up using
[Guest 1]: micro level data from private sources i think the way to go for india increasingly is private data
[Guest 1]: i think we have to move away from this official monopoly over data because we have seen the risks
[Guest 1]: and the dangers associated with that and the lack of accountability and lack of credibility and
[Guest 1]: transparency right so i think at some point of time we have to realize that there has to be a
[Guest 1]: lot of private sector involvement in data data collection data generation data dissemination
[Guest 1]: in whichever form and shape it can be because at least there is a little bit more accountability
[Guest 1]: there because they are they are responsible to their shareholders or to whoever the stakeholders
[Guest 1]: are um so they're hopefully not going to be as uh you know sort of ignorant about or or
[Guest 1]: careless about all of these problems so i definitely think that private sector data
[Guest 1]: and to the extent possible primary level data collection i think secondary data the moment
[Guest 1]: is collected by government agencies runs into all these problems so surveys conducted by private
[Guest 1]: organizations like cmie if you get funding conducting own surveys to get i mean i'm
[Guest 1]: talking about researchers at this point of time right primary level data and and that's that's
[Guest 1]: real tragic because you know it takes up a lot of time effort energy to even put the data together
[Guest 1]: and we are far away from even reaching the state where you can analyze the data and say something
[Guest 1]: about the economy so to answer the question on twitter i honestly don't have a good answer to
[Guest 1]: that i mean what do i say for example to my mother who just asks me okay what number do i look at to
[Guest 1]: understand you know is the future for the next five years going to be good or bad or how is
[Guest 1]: the economy doing after the pandemic i don't know what to say to her i mean am i going to sit and
[Guest 1]: explain to her or look at abc series of course not so i think it's a it's a feeling by the way
[Guest 1]: not just in india i think it's happening all over the world all over the world there is problem with
[Guest 1]: data i was i was in in paris 2019 before the lockdown happened and there was a big oecd level
[Guest 1]: data conference and the main title of the conference was trust in official statistics
[Guest 1]: so it's a problem that's happening in ems and developing countries all over the world i mean
[Guest 1]: we have always known china has data problems and now we have woken up to the reality that
[Guest 1]: all ems have data problems so i think private sector collecting data primary level survey
[Guest 1]: primary level data collection that's the way to go i mean we have to increasingly move away from
[Guest 1]: government data sources although and i think the challenge here is going to be i i i i support
[Guest 2]: the problem is i think we're in this very odd catch-22 when it comes to data so if you have
[Guest 2]: government data then you know there are problems with it but if you use for example see we know
[Guest 2]: what happens when in and you know i write sometimes reports for the government immediately there will
[Guest 2]: be questions about well what about this source it's incomplete so nothing because it's not even
[Guest 2]: like the good is becoming the enemy of the perfect here it's almost like half the data is becoming
[Guest 2]: the enemy of the other half and what does that mean it's a zero-sum game in the end there's like
[Guest 2]: nothing that you can trust and we seem to now just be stuck in this and you know i think what is a
[Guest 2]: very helpful hopeful example of maybe the solution out is take us sir for example they went out and
[Guest 2]: constructed their own metrics of education they did not rely on any government they didn't recreate
[Guest 2]: a government survey they just said we want to do something on our own they went out and they
[Guest 2]: have a machinery which is very well financed supported motivated because they are they are
[Guest 2]: focused on a cause and they cover and measure this data and i think it has actually now led
[Guest 2]: to although the government does dispute right they say we have our own learning measures
[Guest 2]: but at the end of the day that tussle has led to something that is actually more
[Guest 2]: is better to improving it is actually now a better equilibrium of how we understand learning data to
[Guest 2]: be i think that kind of work now has to slowly start to happen i don't think it can happen in
[Guest 2]: everything because i don't think the private sector has the resources to even manage i mean
[Guest 2]: then the real question is what is our large statistical machinery also supposed to be doing
[Guest 2]: right either you say well we want to just dismantle it or you focus on collecting
[Guest 2]: gdp data better and figure out why you know there are all these inconsistencies i think the real
[Guest 2]: question has to be a few areas for example consumption to me is one of the core areas
[Guest 2]: because you can't say anything about the economy without knowing what's happening to household
[Guest 2]: consumption and right now that's still very much up in the air so i think i would actually be very
[Guest 2]: narrow i would say you know take a few measures which really do then help build up and do have
[Guest 2]: links to all kinds of policy domains consumption to me is one of them more than perhaps even income
[Guest 2]: because i've realized income is so noisy you're never going to this is just for anyone listening
[Guest 2]: i think all of us know this but it's important to say don't believe household income estimates
[Guest 2]: when people are just average on reporting them because it's just the noisiest dirtiest measure
[Guest 2]: right but consumption on the other hand particularly if you collect it in a certain way
[Guest 2]: that to me is where i agree i think the private sector has to come in given that right now the
[Guest 2]: public sector is not taking care of that knowledge good so i think i just double down but i'd be very
[Guest 2]: narrow and i'd say look at the asar example as almost a pathway out of this bad equilibrium
[Guest 2]: we're in and perhaps try and recreate that around consumption right and and i'm honestly
[Guest 2]: the sense i have is it's probably going to be organizations like cmi who will have to sort of
[Guest 2]: improve the measure improve the sample you know all these engage with the feedback that they're
[Guest 2]: getting from different quarters and try and see how can we make it more accessible that you know
[Guest 2]: consumption data is just more easily accessible it's rigorous and it's standardized uh while we
[Guest 2]: keep waiting for the next nss consumption round to come out and i don't know when that will be
[Guest 1]: so i think we definitely need more cmis in the sense that you know cmi itself took a very long
[Guest 1]: time to be legitimate and today for example we don't talk about the unemployment data coming
[Guest 1]: out from the government we talk about the labor force participation rate which is almost exclusively
[Guest 1]: a cmi construct uh before cmi came up with the women labor force participation rate of less than
[Guest 1]: 10 percent nobody was worried about women unemployment right because we just could not
[Guest 1]: measure it so i think it takes time i think cmi took almost 20 30 years but they have found the
[Guest 1]: legitimacy and today vast sections of researchers and everybody they are practitioners everybody's
[Guest 1]: using cmi data to understand some parts of the economy and there i think the the big value
[Guest 1]: addition they have done is they have one other than looking at households data which is very
[Guest 1]: important they've also start they've been looking for the longest of time at firm level data
[Guest 1]: and firm level data gives you a lot of picture about what's happening in the economy because
[Guest 1]: ultimately the firms that are producing gdp so who are the firms borrowing from how many are
[Guest 1]: they employing i mean what is what is the kind of output they're producing that gives you that
[Guest 1]: micro level picture which you can then use to get a sense of what's happening in the economy
[Guest 1]: so i think we definitely need more cmis and they have figured out the resourcing as well because
[Guest 1]: they're sort of selling the data as a good as an output that they're producing and and that is
[Guest 1]: something that just has to happen more sr completely i agree with that and i think the need
[Guest 1]: for the government statistical organization of the government machinery apparatus is for example to
[Guest 1]: do something do something like census like nobody other than the government can do a census or even
[Guest 1]: to calculate gdp right i mean gdp has a kind of official legitimacy across countries of the world
[Guest 1]: that no other indicator can ever match up to with all its shortcomings so to that extent i think
[Guest 1]: they will be there and they will be used by government agencies themselves but there has to be
[Guest 1]: this parallel data movement spearheaded by organizations like sr and cmi so that we don't
[Guest 1]: get sort of you know blindsided by suppression of reports and problematic data can i just you
[Guest 2]: know one thing and this is actually this is actually what makes me really sad about what's
[Guest 2]: happened to the statistical architecture of india because actually there's a very what was the
[Guest 2]: original statistical architecture of india and rajeshwari like it was a boys club of like bangali
[Guest 2]: and some malayali men exactly and you know it was exactly yeah and what's actually really
[Guest 2]: interesting and it's something i've been like following now maybe something i'll do in the
[Guest 2]: future is that actually it is an architecture that became much more feminized much more inclusive
[Guest 2]: our premier now data journalists so many really good data scientists are women
[Guest 2]: um there was a lot of work there was something called the delhi group that used to sit together
[Guest 2]: with the nss there were people like ranana jhabwala and so many people involved in trying
[Guest 2]: to make sure that women's work unpaid and you know all of that was measured by the formal
[Guest 2]: government machinery and that really fed into this big crisis now that we discuss around labor
[Guest 2]: force issues so it's not like this was not an architecture that was not open to change reform
[Guest 2]: absorbing it was actually a very progressive it was moving in that direction and then now we're
[Guest 2]: in this place where rajeshwari and i are saying things like well we need to look at you know
[Guest 2]: someone else to collect consumption and you just do the census it actually i mean it's a it is
[Guest 2]: depressing but again because i want to sort of end on i want to focus on hope as opposed to
[Guest 2]: depression we still do have agencies that are collecting this data they are attacked left right
[Guest 2]: center but they're they're dealing with it and cmi is one of them and you also have uh organizations
[Guest 2]: during the covid pandemic it was you know swan put out an entire report on what was happening to
[Guest 2]: migrant workers there are all kinds of organizations who are producing now data
[Guest 2]: um i think now it's going to perhaps be required of donor organizations or development agencies or
[Guest 2]: these organizations to think about how do we standardize some of these modes of collection
[Guest 2]: because there is going to be a lot of data collection that's going to happen now outside
[Guest 2]: and won't even be technically survey agencies or you know the private vendor it'll be other
[Guest 2]: organizations and some standardization and that would also be good by the way one thing i want
[Guest 1]: to add to be fair is that there are some government data which are definitely better than the rest so
[Guest 1]: for example when we look at inflation um and we have looked carefully at the cpi inflation
[Guest 1]: measurement etc that is definitely at par with what's done with the western countries and there
[Guest 1]: is very little room for doubting that data per se so there are some series where the statistical
[Guest 1]: organization is still doing a very good job but at the same time there are other series like
[Guest 1]: consumption unemployment gdp where there are problems i think the problem there is a common
[Guest 1]: person wouldn't know how do you distinguish between a bad gdp and a good inflation data right
[Guest 1]: so for example in the us they came up with this amazing project called 1 billion prices
[Guest 1]: where you are basically collecting data on retail prices from the websites like amazon
[Guest 1]: etc and all the online retail websites that there are and you're every day you're basically setting
[Guest 1]: an algorithm where the computer is going and scraping data from all the websites on a daily
[Guest 1]: basis an hourly basis and you get really high frequency price level data from the online retail
[Guest 1]: in the us of course it's even better because there's a large presence of online retail to the
[Guest 1]: extent in india we have a big basket and amazon a flip card it's even possible to do in india and i
[Guest 1]: know that there are economists who have done that so i think all of these efforts you may not end up
[Guest 1]: using it for anything but it makes it that much harder for government agencies to sort of i don't
[Guest 1]: want to use the word fool you but it makes it that much harder for the government agencies to hide
[Guest 1]: uh what the actual truth is because you just have many series out there and together somebody will
[Guest 1]: question that oh no but why that number is looking like this and why is yours like that
[Amit Varma]: and there is definitely some benefit to that so a final sort of question before we go into the break
[Amit Varma]: by final i don't mean final final but which is this that you know earlier we spoke about how
[Amit Varma]: there's been a sort of continuity in terms of economic ideal ideology across governments
[Amit Varma]: they're all statist and distrust markets and so on and so forth there's also been a good kind of
[Amit Varma]: continuity that has been there at parts within the policy establishment in the same sense that
[Amit Varma]: ajay spoke about that ecosystem building up in the late 80s so in 91 when the reforms happened
[Amit Varma]: you had that you know carter of people who could carry that shit out similarly you know in under
[Amit Varma]: watch by his government they were always talking to the opposition when that transition happened
[Amit Varma]: in 2014 for a while as puja uh writes in her book the lost decade uh you know you had chidambaram's
[Amit Varma]: people kind of continuing with jaitley's people and there was a continuity there till a few months
[Amit Varma]: into uh you know the regime as it were everything went to hell so now the question is a dual one
[Amit Varma]: one is what is you know in terms of continuity has in terms of that sense that we are all working to
[Amit Varma]: solve the same problem has something broken down drastically and therefore is this degradation of
[Amit Varma]: all of these institutions which give us data is that degradation you know willful malice or is it
[Amit Varma]: just incompetence and perhaps the next time around it can get you know there is hope that we might
[Guest 2]: get back on the path of progress so i'll say two things the the statistical machinery and this is
[Guest 2]: by the way true of the indian bureaucracy i mean this is i think the way the bureaucracy is
[Guest 2]: architected you have you know what i wouldn't even use call it the flailing state but essentially the
[Guest 2]: idea that you have people who are technical minds up top who have always been very bright dynamic
[Guest 2]: but even with the statistical machinery prior to this particular phase there were lots of issues
[Guest 2]: about recruitment training management of the local levels of data collection management so
[Guest 2]: i almost feel that it was a system which was ready for a crisis because there were
[Guest 2]: signs of all of this already coming out and and and and i have sympathy for those in for example
[Guest 2]: mosby who say that there's a reason why also technical reasons why to do with staff to do
[Guest 2]: with design to do with all kinds of questions that some of the data is not so i have sympathy
[Guest 2]: for that i have no patience for it but i have sympathy for it if you know i think those are
[Guest 2]: two different things um it's almost like you're talking about your children or something if you
[Guest 2]: would have them sympathy but i do i do i actually i don't know i really i you know this i mentioned
[Guest 2]: this in my book i have a lot of i think i've grown up around statisticians when i was very young
[Guest 2]: they are in my life and i think there is a lot of i know it's a very tough job and being a surveyor
[Guest 2]: you know is probably one of the toughest jobs in this country to collect any to elicit responses
[Guest 2]: from people and you know this amit and so i think for me yes maybe maybe not children like i find it
[Guest 2]: i find it damn easy actually yeah you find it very easy i'm sure but maybe we should put you
[Guest 2]: in a statistical organization yeah yeah i think it's yeah but you need a million of me yes exactly
[Amit Varma]: which i'd be difficult clone you also i have a feeling he'll just go off it's another target
[Guest 2]: to them you know yeah this is the thing tell me about your childhood yes yes let's talk about
[Guest 2]: your story as opposed to the sugar that you consumed in the last week but anyway i almost
[Guest 2]: feel like you know in this kind of context it was ready for a crisis then there has been obviously
[Guest 2]: there are politics now to clearly data and i think rajeshwari was alluding to this i think the two
[Guest 2]: have just now concocted and created this complete storm right where now there's like silence i mean
[Guest 2]: there's barely any data coming out um i also think part of it is something we were discussing earlier
[Guest 2]: which is that i think the level of scrutiny on the health of any metric because of social media
[Guest 2]: because we are now there is a kind of polity which is far more interested in scrutinizing
[Guest 2]: lots of things debating for good or for bad um as a consequence there's also a lot of fear around
[Guest 2]: well what if we put things out which are just you know not there are issues which i have a feeling
[Guest 2]: maybe in the past you could sort of test and experiment and learn and there were measures
[Guest 2]: by the way for example when they were trying to measure women's informal work there were some
[Guest 2]: measures that just did not work at all i have a feeling maybe if that happened now there would
[Guest 2]: be such a set of storm and stories around it and given that politics now is so closely linked to
[Guest 2]: the news cycle and how you're represented and image and all of that i think that's also making
[Guest 2]: it worse um having said that though i do still think that in state governments planning departments
[Guest 2]: which take the ownership particularly of collecting local data i think they are still very committed
[Guest 2]: to the idea of at least collecting information because they have to put it in their state plans
[Guest 2]: their state budgets and i think a lot of the data story amit is also related to the planning story
[Guest 2]: because when the planning commission went and was replaced with what is the niti ayog now a lot of
[Guest 2]: the fundamental where the data was going right and some of the decision making which was almost
[Guest 2]: binding because you had to there were budget allocations that were done on it there were
[Guest 2]: poverty estimations that were being done when all of that went some of the push in the system
[Guest 2]: the almost you know like how in india everything happens in mission mode that mission mode in the
[Guest 2]: system evaporated so i have a feeling part of it is also then the incentives in the system
[Guest 2]: to get certain things done also started to recede so i think it's a combination of three but i
[Guest 2]: wouldn't just put it on malice i think there is also there are genuine questions about
[Guest 2]: bureaucratic reform not just i mean definitely in the statistical architecture but i think this is
[Guest 2]: larger parts of the bureaucracy others on your show have talked about this and i think that
[Guest 1]: meets malice and then you have the outcome that you do so i i largely agree with what shana said
[Guest 1]: i think it's the answer is not as straightforward as saying it's either malice or incompetence right
[Guest 1]: because for example if you just look at the gdp data it's an extremely complicated task to collect
[Guest 1]: data and compute the gdp of a country and we are talking about the largest democracy of the world
[Guest 1]: gdp collection process in india is an is a complete nightmare and and you have to remember that india
[Guest 1]: was at the frontier of statistical data collection back in the 60s and 70s during the mahalanobis
[Guest 1]: period etc and we were actually i mean our advice the advice of our statisticians was sought by the
[Guest 1]: western countries in order to build a statistical structure and system so we were at that level so
[Guest 1]: we did something right i mean we definitely got that edifice that is statistical structure right
[Guest 1]: but i think what happened down the line is and i agree completely with what shana said here is that
[Guest 1]: we also needed to continuously reform the statistical bureaucracy like as we were
[Guest 1]: reforming the country as we were opening up the country which became vastly more complex
[Guest 1]: than the centrally planned closed economy of the 60s and 70s we suddenly have a very complex modern
[Guest 1]: market economy with a statist edifice imposed on top of it but we've somewhere down the line
[Guest 1]: forgot to reform the statistical bureaucracy we forgot to improve their capacity strengthen their
[Guest 1]: capacity with numbers skill quality everything so you have like a the same system that continued
[Guest 1]: from the 60s and 70s but you're now putting the pressure of computing the gdp of a significantly
[Guest 1]: more complex economy and you have the pressure of meeting international standards in fact the
[Guest 1]: latest revision of gdp was done primarily to take india's gdp method to the international
[Guest 1]: standards you have that pressure as well and there is increased scrutiny exactly as shana said
[Guest 1]: because now suddenly it's not just 10 statisticians sitting in isa calcutta have access to the data
[Guest 1]: there is everybody who has access to the data and everybody can ask questions about the data
[Guest 1]: so i think that the combination of that led to the crumbling of that edifice so to speak and then
[Guest 1]: somewhere down the line you know you realize that you are in a secular stagnation for 10 years
[Guest 1]: you were just not aware of it because you were looking at some other numbers or you just chose
[Guest 1]: to be oblivious about it and then suddenly a survey comes out which shows that consumption
[Guest 1]: has like four decade low unemployment is four decade high what do you do about it you suddenly
[Guest 1]: you don't have a coherent economic strategy you don't have an economic policy or election is down
[Guest 1]: the road what do you do with it so i wouldn't put it in malice it's almost like a political
[Guest 1]: compulsion don't release the survey because then we are going to look really bad so i think it's
[Guest 1]: a combination of everything but the problem is that they probably could have addressed it by
[Guest 1]: being a little bit more transparent and being a bit more proactive about taking steps to address
[Guest 1]: the problem which they did not do and we kept waiting for when it's the next consumption survey
[Guest 1]: is going to happen when are they going to fix the gdp problems they just did not do it so the
[Guest 1]: silence on the part of the statistical organization is what i think compounded the problem even more
[Guest 1]: because by now it's been 2015 was when gdp data was released 2017 was when the service was
[Guest 1]: suppressed we are in 2022 and we have not seen any steps being taken by them can i just add just two
[Guest 2]: quick things i mean the reason the last plfs was released was because essentially the statisticians
[Guest 2]: went on strike and i agree with rajesh i think we need to see more of this hartaal culture perhaps
[Guest 2]: in in our statistical bureaucracy something that the bongs got right yeah exactly um and the second
[Guest 2]: thing i want to actually say is you know what is actually a very exciting source of new data now
[Guest 2]: is transaction data uh all kinds of data that's we're all always exchanging data every day problem
[Guest 2]: is we don't have a data privacy law yet it's been debated till adam in parliament i believe it's now
[Guest 2]: again gone back and there's again jpc looking at it if you don't even have a data privacy framework
[Guest 2]: then a lot of the other exciting parts of the data while we're waiting for government data to
[Guest 2]: organize itself even that you can't use one for forget service delivery for example i'll give you
[Guest 2]: one example you know we're talking about welfare right one of the things everybody says countries
[Guest 2]: like brazil have done is you have a unified registry right uh where you say that well one
[Guest 2]: household receives four benefits and i know you know what these benefits are in india number one
[Guest 2]: you can't even do that currently at the state or national level because you can't there is no legal
[Guest 2]: framework to protect the data and the movement of data uh you would think this is something that is
[Guest 2]: absolutely fundamental so one not just for the delivery of basic goods and services but also to
[Guest 2]: understand what's happening to transactions and going back to what rajesh shree was saying about
[Guest 2]: the the micro constituents of macro variables you could do a lot of exciting stuff but where is the
[Guest 2]: data privacy framework so i just want to double down what she said but also say i think there are
[Guest 2]: alternative sources of data available but the use of them are very gray and nebulous because until
[Guest 2]: we have laws in place we aren't also able to carefully use them by the way one data that i
[Guest 1]: would definitely look forward to using going forward would be gst data because goods and
[Guest 1]: services tax can be a very good alternative proxy to a gdp or an overall aggregate indicator to
[Guest 1]: understanding how the economy is doing and the more the government release it releases it in a
[Guest 1]: more transparent manner more disaggregated manner the better so i would hope seriously that that
[Guest 1]: continues and more disaggregated data comes out because that is something that we can look at as
[Amit Varma]: an alternative proxy in fact one of the questions that came in on twitter was from sahil khanwala
[Amit Varma]: who said code gst receipts crossed 140 crores in march 22 does this mean gst is finally
[Amit Varma]: successfully implemented has it has a net positive effect on the economy i i don't think it is it
[Guest 1]: says much about the implementation of gst as much as it does about normalization of the economy after
[Guest 1]: the pandemic so you're basically seeing opening up of economic activity or just seeing a you know
[Guest 1]: shutdowns and lockdowns are gone the economy is back to sort of doing the activities that it's
[Guest 1]: supposed to be doing and therefore there's a revival of pent-up demand all of that is happening
[Guest 1]: and that's showing up in the gst data i don't think it i mean it's difficult to disentangle
[Guest 1]: the two but i don't think it has got so much to do with the implementation of gst can i just add
[Guest 2]: one thing i hear a lot of people say to me well look at the gst numbers they're just and it's
[Guest 2]: all so great and i can see both of you are just giggling at this because i think all of us have
[Guest 2]: heard it one thing i will say to anyone it's really young people listening to us if you
[Guest 2]: lead the gst numbers great exactly as rajeshwari said look also at the employment unemployment
[Guest 2]: that's coming out of cmi i would almost force everyone it's a it's a it's a practice it should
[Guest 2]: be good practice that once you look at gst also look at the labor market because i think you have
[Guest 2]: to look at the two of them in conjunction to understand what's happening because they do kind
[Guest 2]: of sometimes they give you a different picture but i think it's useful just so that we don't
[Amit Varma]: get carried away sometimes with this you know the numbers that are being reported and i'm also
[Amit Varma]: skeptical of any kind of tax collections going up because taxes to me are a transfer from the
[Amit Varma]: productive part of the economy to the parasitic part of the economy and on that note we shall
[Guest 1]: take a quick break i don't think we can we can say the same about indirect access or sort of you know gst but
[Guest 1]: anyways that's a different debate altogether but i do agree that we have to look at multiple series
[Guest 1]: i think that's very clear by now you can't put all your eggs in one basket and say just one series and
[Amit Varma]: we know how the economy and i have to tell you uh i loved um shrena's phrase just now when when she
[Amit Varma]: spoke about how excited she is by micro constituents of macro variables that's uh you know such uh
[Guest 2]: superb geekery thank you this is what you elicit in us on that note we'll take a break
[Amit Varma]: and when we come back we'll go much deeper into our adda long before i was a podcaster i was a
[Amit Varma]: writer in fact chances are that many of you first heard of me because of my blog india uncut which
[Amit Varma]: was active between 2003 and 2009 and became somewhat popular at the time i love the freedom
[Amit Varma]: the form gave me and i feel i was shaped by it in many ways i exercise my writing muscle every day
[Amit Varma]: and was forced to think about many different things because i wrote about many different
[Amit Varma]: things well that phase in my life ended for various reasons and now it is time to revive
[Amit Varma]: it only now i'm doing it through a newsletter i have started the india uncut newsletter at india
[Amit Varma]: uncut.substack.com where i will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy i'll write about
[Amit Varma]: some of the themes i cover in this podcast and about much else so please do head on over to
[Amit Varma]: indiauncut.substack.com and subscribe it is free once you sign up each new installment that i write
[Amit Varma]: will land up in your email inbox you don't need to go anywhere so subscribe now for free the
[Amit Varma]: india uncut newsletter at indiauncut.substack.com thank you welcome back to the scene in the unseen
[Amit Varma]: i'm chatting with rajeshwari and shreyana and uh i had announced at the start of this episode
[Amit Varma]: that we're going to talk about rajeshwari's life and so on and so forth and well as modiji says
[Amit Varma]: but the situation we are in is that we have like an hour of talking left and there are many things
[Amit Varma]: about the economy to discuss and rajeshwari has promised to come back at some point in time for
[Amit Varma]: a five or six hour episode uh where we can go into deep detail into her life uh you know which
[Amit Varma]: is fascinating because her family has a rich cultural history her uh her ancestors uh in fact
[Amit Varma]: held the first uh durga puja in a particular part of durga puja in the city in celebration
[Amit Varma]: to celebrate robert clive's victory in the battle of plassey yeah so uh patriots of existing regimes
[Guest 2]: from a long time but so i'm so relieved we are talking about my life i think maybe this is a
[Amit Varma]: good tactical move yeah no no i really i don't want to rush through this because uh i i think
[Amit Varma]: that rajeshwari's had a really interesting life and it'll be great fun so we shall save that for
[Amit Varma]: later but meanwhile both of you mentioned that you had kind of questions for each other so why
[Amit Varma]: don't we go with that and then we can go on to whatever you know we'll take some stuff from
[Guest 1]: twitter and perhaps things will occur to me as well sure so i uh had a question for shreyana
[Guest 1]: i was listening to the podcast which i thoroughly loved um and i told you on the email as well that
[Guest 1]: i really like the way you combine the bollywood pop culture with economics and labor market outcomes
[Guest 1]: which i mean i would have never even thought about so the question that i had i guess was that
[Guest 1]: so the way you are sort of you know the way shahrukh khan enters into the book is basically
[Guest 1]: the fact that he's sort of more much more of a feminist actor compared to the other actors of
[Guest 1]: his generation in the sense that he's much more caring and his his views towards women and the
[Guest 1]: way he deals with women is very different from the way his iconography is different from the way the
[Guest 1]: other big actors of his time would deal with and that is what makes women relate to him a lot more
[Guest 1]: i guess than or rather become his fans much more than than others so basically you know i mean he
[Guest 1]: comes across as much more of a person that women feel comfortable with or women feel that they
[Guest 1]: want that kind of a boyfriend or a husband who's going to be giving importance to them etc etc
[Guest 1]: so i guess that the doubt that i had which is just pure doubt just as i was listening to the podcast
[Guest 1]: is that you're an amir fan is that no i'm not i'm not a fan of anyone in bollywood per se but
[Guest 1]: but basically i think the question that i had was that is isn't it fair to say that while shahrukh
[Guest 1]: i mean the way he was in most of the portrayal of the roles that he did in the movies
[Guest 1]: at the same time all the women actresses in his movies they didn't really have a lot to do per
[Guest 1]: se and now hear me out when i let me finish this so what i'm trying to say is that even if you take
[Guest 1]: a classic movie like ddlj right where it's true i mean the boy falls in love with girl and it's all
[Guest 1]: very romantic and it's all very nice and he's dealing with simran is also very nice and caring
[Guest 1]: and loving and sweet and all of that but ultimately he's the one who does the entire job of
[Guest 1]: convincing simran's parents he's the one who goes all the way to india he's the one who's doing all
[Guest 1]: the quoting and convincing and you know all of that and while the girl is just sitting demurely
[Guest 1]: waiting for him to be done with whatever he's doing so that you know they can get together so
[Guest 1]: she doesn't really have a whole lot of things to do in the second half of the movie and likewise
[Guest 1]: for example if i think of either you know or all the other movies of that particular time period
[Guest 1]: the women don't really have a lot to do i mean i'm not talking about women having agency but
[Guest 1]: i'm just saying that other than romancing or other than you know the romantic complications
[Guest 1]: that entail in the movies there's not a whole lot that the women are actually doing in terms of you
[Guest 1]: know do they have jobs what is their viewpoints what is their choice across different men are
[Guest 1]: they even exercising a choice what agency do they have etc and if i contrast that and maybe this was
[Guest 1]: reflective of the way society was back then that we were liberalizing but we still had a lot of
[Guest 1]: hangover of the past of tradition women not really playing a very powerful role in society and family
[Guest 1]: etc and if i contrast that to now for example i mean some of the movies that i have seen
[Guest 1]: let's say Vicky Kaushal comes to mind and i'm not talking about the person as you know whether
[Guest 1]: i'm a fan or not but i'm just saying the roles that he essays so for example you have a movie
[Guest 1]: like Manmarzia where there is a woman who has a choice between two men and he actually exercises
[Guest 1]: the choice to go with one and not the other or for example there is love per square foot where
[Guest 1]: the girl and the boy decide to get married because each of them wants to own a home
[Guest 1]: whereas love and romance is not the reason for the marriage the girl has as much agency
[Guest 1]: as the boy does or for example even Alia Bhatt movies like for example a highway where she chooses
[Guest 1]: to stay with the abductor because she doesn't want to go back home and then when the abductor is
[Guest 1]: killed she just abandons her own family and goes to the mountains and does her own business and
[Guest 1]: builds a home which is tremendous amount of energy agency on part of a young girl again other examples
[Guest 1]: so i guess you know Priyanka Chopra in Dil Dharakne Do this movie that i have seen recently
[Guest 1]: where she she gets a divorce and she manages the father's business which is again tremendous
[Guest 1]: amount of agency on part of a woman and in fact the brother which is Ranveer Singh is being
[Guest 1]: portrayed as a good for nothing so i think that's just a marked departure even Yeh Jawani Hai Diwani
[Guest 1]: i mean Ranveer Kapoor being a very lovey-dovey boy but then Deepika Padukone in that movie
[Guest 1]: has a job i mean she's a medical student who's very good in her studies we don't ever see her
[Guest 2]: working at least she has a role which is basically she has a role in a clinic no they all have jobs
[Guest 2]: which is compared to all the other women we've seen in the Shahrukh Khan movies but they're not
[Guest 2]: doing anything no but now i will protest actually factually that's incorrect because Preeti Zinta
[Guest 2]: there's an how does she meet Saif Ali Khan in Kal Ho Na Ho it's because she's studying to be a
[Guest 2]: management student each one of the women Simran is probably actually the only one and in fact
[Guest 2]: that's part of the big reason why a lot of the women who i interviewed said to me that well
[Guest 2]: Simran can't live on her own so he better make sure that Simran's father supports
[Guest 2]: the match so actually that's not true because if you look at a lot of his films Swades
[Guest 2]: the teacher her teaching is very prominent and important in fact and what Swades to know that
[Guest 2]: is not a woman who has no agency so look at Swades Kal Ho Na Ho as well because remember
[Guest 2]: actually she has a choice between Saif and Shahrukh she realizes Shahrukh's not interested
[Guest 2]: because he's married she's going to marry Saif there's a lot going on Veer Zara as well the
[Guest 1]: reason she goes to India is because she wants to find but you won't agree that the recent there
[Guest 2]: has been definitely a transition i'll come to that in a second so i think so that's one so i
[Guest 2]: think we should just retire the idea that the women don't have agency or don't have jobs because
[Guest 2]: that's just statistically actually not true because in these movies his last film Zero is
[Guest 2]: a remarkable film because it has a scientist or an actress who he is besotted with both of whom
[Guest 2]: and they both just reject him and Amit and I were joking in fact during the last podcast and you
[Guest 2]: know the the rejection is literally made caught is made literal by the fact that he is vertically
[Guest 2]: challenged or you know is suffers from dwarfism and they say you don't measure up to me right
[Guest 2]: um so i think that's one so i don't think that that's true and i also think agency is not just
[Guest 2]: there's a kind of flatness to the visual medium agency is not just us having one dialogue saying
[Guest 2]: oh the girl has a job for example Deepika Padukone in that Yeh Jawaani she is doing nothing but
[Guest 2]: basically in actually all of Ranbir Kapoor's films the women do nothing but essentially be
[Guest 2]: the supportive savior or the manic pixie dream girl or and they are all they all at some point
[Guest 2]: have a job like there's a you know there'll be someone doing something but you never actually
[Guest 2]: their jobs don't necessarily intersect with the storyline per se i think where things are actually
[Guest 2]: very different is when women write films so take Dear Zindagi where actually the principal conflict
[Guest 2]: is Shah Rukh is playing a therapist to Alia Bhatt trying to figure out what to do with her career
[Guest 2]: and her personal life she's very unhappy with the way her career is going and it is up front
[Guest 2]: center in that movie and he in fact plays almost he's like the supporting character
[Guest 2]: to a film that is about her conflicts right so i think i think just to say i think actually the
[Guest 2]: real axis of shift i don't think is in just the whether we have one dialogue or two dialogues
[Guest 2]: where they go to office or they show her how much of a woman's ambition uh to run an NGO
[Guest 2]: to run a magazine so Preeti Zinta runs a magazine by the way in Kabhi Alweda Na Kehna
[Guest 2]: the wife's career is actually the principal fault line in that Shah Rukh film because he is unable
[Guest 2]: to handle her success so again going back to that idea that women in his films definitely have
[Guest 2]: career paths and i think you know it's just just because but even with that i don't particularly
[Guest 2]: think it's a great portrayal of women so i would never say that the women are portrayed like it
[Guest 1]: lavishingly well i just feel that now increasingly women are relatively speaking definitely
[Guest 2]: portrayed better than what it was you know i i actually here's the thing i and Parumita Vohra
[Guest 2]: actually recently did a piece about this and i i completely agree with her you know i had done
[Guest 2]: this thing where i measure how much women speak in film and someone in a newspaper had reported on
[Guest 2]: this and they had interviewed Parumita and one of the things she actually said and i think it really
[Guest 2]: stayed with me is that she felt that visual mediums have become very gendered of late right
[Guest 2]: and what that basically means is that there's this constant need to show that the woman is
[Guest 2]: being portrayed well because there is this scrutinizing gaze going back to what we were
[Guest 2]: talking about but it's almost like the ways you're fighting stereotypes are so stereotypical
[Guest 2]: um i don't think in fact other than a wonderful OTT show which is about a Delhi police officer
[Guest 2]: i'm forgetting the name of the show well there's that but there's another one as well i'm yet to
[Guest 2]: see or luck by chance actually is one of the best films i think to me when it comes to sort of women's
[Guest 1]: agency job all of that right but you wouldn't agree there are increasingly more women-centric
[Guest 2]: scripts being written i think they're very formulaic i think they're actually really boring
[Guest 2]: to be honest i see some of the stuff and it's almost like you want to show a woman is empowered
[Guest 2]: so there's some kind of like prototypical way a woman is empowered and i'm not sure i don't buy
[Guest 1]: into it i don't feel the conflict for example if you think of a razi right i mean yes it's based
[Guest 2]: on true story but then it was not typical at all but this but see this is where i go back to
[Guest 2]: no but here's the thing i think each one of the cases that you're talking about and in fact this
[Guest 2]: is something a lot of people have been writing about in feminism it's like women's stories are
[Guest 2]: now only interesting when they're like heroes or they're victims so they have to like out and out
[Guest 2]: do something really remarkable or be like you know really the sort of you know the brunt of a brutal
[Guest 2]: crime and if you look at a lot of the women-centric movies that tend to come out but let me finish
[Guest 2]: which is to say that i actually think the really interesting bargain texture is happening it's this
[Guest 2]: missing middle of the narrative other than this police crime show i'm going to say there was
[Guest 2]: other one there was gully boy where i thought alia bhatt's role was like beautiful it was so
[Guest 2]: well written there are a few but i think actually the the factor here to me is not so much time i
[Guest 2]: mean i think there were movies in the past that amol palika was part of whether women were like
[Guest 2]: writing journals and doing beautiful interesting things right i don't think it's about time it's
[Guest 2]: not like over time women's representation has become better i actually think it's about
[Guest 2]: sometimes it's often about whether women write those scripts or not i often feel that when women
[Guest 2]: write or direct there's a gaze in the way women are portrayed they're presented which is much more
[Guest 2]: open the luck by chance at the end of the day is a woman is a is a very women-centric film because
[Guest 2]: it is you know very strong woman putting her voice out there so i see what you're saying but i think
[Guest 2]: sometimes to me it feels very sort of oh there's a strong woman so we have these tropes of a strong
[Guest 2]: woman and then we must show them and if you look at pink for example which i think is the worst
[Guest 2]: crime possible on this it is apparently a movie about women's sexual violence but you have amita
[Guest 2]: bachchan speaking through all of the film i mean the women barely have i think i think there are
[Guest 1]: examples on the contrary as well i wouldn't say that all the women-centric movies that are being
[Guest 1]: made are primarily i'm not a movie expert so i shouldn't go too deep into it so that i can't
[Guest 1]: come out of it but at the same time i mean i just as an observer i don't think that most of the
[Guest 1]: women-centric movies that are being made are to show them just as either very powerful heroes or
[Guest 1]: as victims and i think i think at some point i guess also what i'm trying to say is that
[Guest 1]: i would be very happy that the era of a superstar is over that we are never going to have another
[Guest 1]: shahrukh khan because now then there is a scope to experiment with different kind of scripts and
[Guest 1]: possibilities as opposed to just getting sort of overshadowed by this larger than life persona
[Guest 2]: i don't know let me push back against and this is the last thing i'll say on this which is that
[Guest 2]: i don't know i think there's actually something very beautiful when our superstars are not our
[Guest 2]: politicians when our superstars are in cricket when our superstars are in culture when our
[Guest 2]: culture when our superstars are in in the creative arts i think right now we are living by the way
[Guest 2]: in a culture where we have superstars we need a podcasting superstar yeah well we are looking
[Guest 2]: at one who is that i'm getting different responses to you guys but to me actually i think the really
[Guest 2]: interesting question is not whether i don't see it as a zero-sum game i actually think you can
[Guest 2]: have icons who are like really larger than life and people can derive i'm not in the business of
[Guest 2]: judging others for their pleasures that's not my interest at all uh if you know seeing a big icon
[Guest 2]: makes people happy as long as you're not out there lynching people that's fine um if you want to see
[Guest 2]: very complex scripts and all that's great as well i think there's like enough space now for all kinds
[Guest 2]: of mediums and stories but i will say one thing though i think the world where we think that
[Guest 2]: everyone is watching ott and the world of like big superstars that's a really small space um in fact
[Guest 2]: most people are watching ajay devgan's new film or uh you know there are big stars and in fact
[Guest 2]: those stars have become so hideously masculine if you look at the roles akshay kumar ajay devgan
[Guest 2]: and many of these films look at simba which came out which was about a policeman aggressively
[Guest 2]: masculine in fact there was a tweet recently which said the only person who can save masculinity in
[Guest 2]: bollywood is shahrukh khan i completely believe that and i think that uh you can have that um
[Guest 2]: and you can also have these other stories that you're talking about and then you and i can disagree
[Guest 1]: about whether we like them whether we connect with them that's a different story so i mean i mean this
[Amit Varma]: is your cue to ask the more important this is my cue to move on from uh shahrukh khan but i can't
[Amit Varma]: help but uh sort of say two things and one is something that i mentioned in my episode with
[Amit Varma]: her as well that let us not forget that that film you mentioned ends with amrish puri i think it was
[Amit Varma]: everybody read my book to know that that should be interpreted in a very different way yeah but
[Amit Varma]: i interpret it as she has no agency i interpreted it is exactly the same you know what simran should
[Amit Varma]: do simran should leave the dad leave the naka boyfriend and just build a life on her
[Guest 1]: he's not a boyfriend what really irritated me is that that scene became like a legend of sorts
[Unknown]: right and then we saw movies after movies and real life scenarios ads what have you made trying to
[Guest 2]: move on to economics no no but no actually going back i want to actually pick up on economics no
[Guest 2]: but here's the thing which is that uh in fact we live in a world and i can look at that scene and
[Guest 2]: basically say that i judge it for not being feminist she has no agency she's in rural punjab
[Guest 2]: she has no job of her own um at the end of the day i think what's happening is that you know
[Guest 2]: there is a willful acceptance of your constraints and so we can disagree with that but it is also
[Amit Varma]: it is reality so we'll move on and since you mentioned dear zindagi i wrote about it in 2016
[Amit Varma]: when it came out and i just want to read out a few lines from it for our friend here
[Amit Varma]: so a number of points and i'll read out two of them and point number two was practically everything
[Amit Varma]: shahrukh khan's character says is nonsense 90 percent of it is banal like ravi shastri talking
[Amit Varma]: about cricket and the other 10 percent is downright wrong and dangerous like modi talking about
[Amit Varma]: economics the kind of psychotherapy he's shown doing is basically quackery and the way he talks
[Amit Varma]: you'd imagine he's never read a book in his life and spends 20 minutes each week on brainy quotes
[Amit Varma]: and wikipedia simply put the guy's a buffoon this is this character he's been written let me continue
[Amit Varma]: yeah and point you're so upset point number three no no i just want to say these because i'm just
[Amit Varma]: looking at your face as i say them but i wish i wish there was a video of this now yeah point
[Amit Varma]: number three i've often maintained that shahrukh khan is a worst actor in history i know amitabh
[Amit Varma]: was his idol when he entered the industry and while amitabh has done some monumental hamming
[Amit Varma]: in his time shahrukh knocks him out of the park watching shahrukh ham it up in scenes with the
[Amit Varma]: wonderfully naturalistic alia is as painful as watching amitabh ham it up in piku in scenes
[Amit Varma]: with the brilliant irfan khan is the contrast not obvious to viewers am i the only one cringing
[Guest 2]: stop quote you you you were one of the minority cringing that you know yeah we've talked about it
[Unknown]: no no but this is like yeah but no but i i think that yeah amit you've discussed this before
[Amit Varma]: no no no i don't want to move on i don't want to spend like a minute no you can't like throw
[Guest 2]: these quotes and say these things about the most wonderful person in our country and then say all
[Guest 2]: this he is to me one of the most wonderful people in the country he has such a huge um
[Guest 2]: um even though scenes you and you can debate whether you know the psychotherapy that is being
[Guest 2]: there is a sense of cocoon and comfort that i know so many women who deal with like really
[Guest 2]: terrible workplaces watch that film and we've talked about it and i mentioned this in the book
[Guest 2]: they walked out of that film feeling really encouraged and comforted you know especially
[Guest 2]: the thing that he says about the kursi you remember in that film where you can explore
[Guest 2]: different sexual possibilities and don't feel like you need to judge yourself for it
[Guest 2]: it can sound like quackery but actually in our country where no one is actually talking about
[Guest 2]: sex openly it felt very it was actually very comforting to a lot of women and i think
[Guest 2]: you we can sort of judge people based on certain norms or what we think you know the script is
[Guest 2]: acting is all of that but i do think we have to acknowledge that these people are playing very
[Guest 2]: different functions so i just i want to say that okay you've had the last word on sharukh
[Amit Varma]: and now you had a question for rajeshwari as well yes i actually want to know a bit about
[Guest 2]: what what do you still enjoy being an economist i know we we started by saying we were having
[Guest 2]: this conversation about the profession when you entered the profession that were there things that
[Guest 2]: you really loved about the subject and has that sort of kept you going or do you think now you're
[Guest 2]: a different kind of economist than you had thought when you had entered the field you would be i just
[Guest 2]: want to get a sense of i know that you'll come back for an episode on your back's life story
[Guest 2]: but i want to know a bit more about your interest in the field and and how that's you sure um so
[Guest 1]: first of all to answer that that first question i absolutely love being an economist even today
[Guest 1]: and my sense is i continue to love being that the foreseeable future because for me it's almost like
[Guest 1]: combining passion with profession um so i think this i briefly mentioned in the first episode
[Guest 1]: with amit as well that when i was studying economics i didn't really think of myself
[Guest 1]: as an economist of course far from it i didn't even know what i was going to become and i was
[Guest 1]: sort of in the rigmarole of the indian rat race or whatever you call it that i was going from one
[Guest 1]: step to the other i was doing my graduation post-graduation i think when i was doing my
[Guest 1]: post-grad at some point of course i started realizing that i do like the subject for what
[Guest 1]: it is um and this was also the time when india had liberalized right this was early 2000s and
[Guest 1]: it was completely like the way i call it roaring 2000s in india and mind you i had i was coming
[Guest 1]: from calcutta which was the communist bastion and there of course any sign of liberalization
[Guest 1]: privatization was significantly more muted um and but to the extent that i was witnessing it it was
[Guest 1]: a delight for me because you've been born in the 80s and you witness that you actually live through
[Guest 1]: the transition of it in real life and then i went to delhi for my post-grad and of course delhi was
[Guest 1]: like an eye-opener it was a culture shock and an eye-opener both at the same time and and then when
[Guest 1]: i was studying my post-grad i i think my love for economics had started in presidency college when i
[Guest 1]: was doing my undergrad when i went to delhi i was massively disillusioned because in delhi everything
[Guest 1]: was extremely competitive it was about getting a job it was about you know showing off what your
[Guest 1]: salary is and all of that thing and that was exactly not what i had in mind when i was sitting
[Guest 1]: in presidency college library and idealizing about books and stuff and whatnot and therefore i had
[Guest 1]: that period of disillusionment and i actually went to the corporate world it was also fear of missing
[Guest 1]: out all my friends were doing it i wanted to do it as well so i went to the corporate world i did
[Guest 1]: not like it at all um and that's when i think that hankering back to what i had felt during my
[Guest 1]: undergrad studies in presidency came back and i realized that let me give it a shot and let me
[Guest 1]: actually try my hand at research and see if i'm really cut out for it if i'm going to do it and
[Guest 1]: i think that's when i finally seriously started thinking of economics as a profession as a calling
[Guest 1]: and then i went to the u.s to do my phd but even throughout the u.s it was again learning about
[Guest 1]: what we called talked about in the beginning of the episode learning about the theories the models
[Guest 1]: you're basically going through the entire program of it and while i was still doing research
[Guest 1]: it was very mechanical right because i wanted to get a phd i wanted to get some papers out
[Guest 1]: so i was okay i was doing fine but i wasn't particularly the passion for economics and all
[Guest 1]: of that i didn't really feel it per se and then i came back to india and later on we can talk about
[Guest 1]: in different episode why what when and when i came back to india the the funny thing that happened
[Guest 1]: was that i actually had to leave india go to the u.s and come back to india and do all of that
[Guest 1]: journey to finally become an economist and think of myself as an economist and i started sort of
[Guest 1]: like feeling the juice of the subject so to speak because when i came back to india i came to igid
[Guest 1]: in bombay and i met a wonderful bunch of people two of whom are going to be here later on in the
[Guest 1]: evening and they completely changed the way i think about economics the way i wanted to apply
[Guest 1]: economics i was in that zone where like my phd advisor i would write papers get published in the
[Guest 1]: journal you know be a university academic economist that that that myth was completely
[Guest 1]: dispelled when i met this bunch of people and i realized that economics can be a lot more fun than
[Guest 1]: that it can be a lot more it can be made a lot more accessible to people than that and i can have
[Guest 1]: a lot more fun by studying the backyard which is the indian economy because until then i hadn't
[Guest 1]: thought of indian economy at all right because in my mind it was the american university working on
[Guest 1]: economic theories being at the frontier of research and for the first time i strictly exactly
[Guest 1]: remember 2014 was the year when i started thinking that i might do some work on indian economy
[Guest 1]: it will not get published in journals because nobody's interested in indian economy
[Guest 1]: i will never get a job abroad again because it's macro who's interested in indian macro
[Guest 1]: and i was fine with all the trade-offs it was the decision that i had to take that i was fine with
[Guest 1]: these trade-offs because what what lies on offer for me was very very exciting and that's when i
[Guest 1]: got involved in the drafting of the bankruptcy law now for an economist trained in the us if
[Guest 1]: you were to tell me seven years or eight years back before that that i was going to be involved
[Guest 1]: in the drafting of a law i would have thought you know what are you kidding about i mean my friend
[Guest 1]: economists in the us have no idea about how laws are drafted etc but i got involved in the drafting
[Guest 1]: of the ibc which was the most exciting exhilarating experience ever till date i mean for five months
[Guest 1]: we would just think breathe bankruptcy laws which was not even my area per se right but i started
[Guest 1]: understanding how indian economy works how different vested interests work and that's
[Guest 1]: basically the start of my journey as an economist it's as recent as that and then since then i've
[Guest 1]: just been focusing on india and as i said you know it doesn't get me a lot of top journal
[Guest 1]: publications it will never get me a job outside india if i ever want to go outside anywhere
[Guest 1]: but the satisfaction is is enormous my friends who are economists in the us would not even
[Guest 1]: remotely come close to the idea of drafting a law because they are just so far away from the policy
[Guest 1]: and the legal space of it whereas what happened with me was that i got to know a whole bunch of
[Guest 1]: very interesting lawyers policymakers no academic economists so to speak what is called mainstream
[Guest 1]: academic economist and it was a whole lot of fun i mean i was basically just having fun i was called
[Guest 1]: by the jpc in the parliament to depose i mean i was in a completely different world from what i
[Guest 1]: had visualized when i started my phd and then i i just fell in love with it i just fell in love with
[Guest 1]: the idea of understanding indian economy uh giving it back to the best possible way that i can which
[Guest 1]: is through teaching my students writing in the media doing a whole lot of talk shows uh panel
[Guest 1]: discussions so i just make myself available whenever i get an invitation because that's my
[Guest 1]: way of getting my own concepts right and also getting the concepts accessible to whoever is
[Guest 1]: listening out so i think i've had a complete ball of a time since 2015 and knock on wood and and i
[Guest 1]: hope i anticipate that that's going to continue going forward and as i said this is nothing the
[Guest 1]: way i had visualized mainstream economics was going to be and to a large extent the credit
[Guest 1]: lies to the people that i got to know in 2014 2015 who got tremendous influences in my life
[Guest 1]: and yeah i mean i'm just having a whole lot of fun at this point of time although everything
[Guest 1]: that the economy has gone down south since then but just analyzing it and mind you i mean before
[Guest 1]: 2014 i didn't even think of the indian economy per se right and now i'm really into understanding
[Guest 1]: what's happening what's going on how can i do better how can i teach my students better
[Guest 1]: what articles can i write in lay person's language so that people can understand and it's it's
[Guest 1]: challenging it's it's exciting so yeah i really like it so yeah it's definitely not the economist
[Guest 1]: i never had a vision of myself as an economist when i went to the u.s i thought i was going to
[Guest 1]: be one of those tenure-track university professors i'm so glad and relieved that i came back and
[Guest 1]: tremendously grateful to the people who have influenced me um and i think i'm just very very
[Amit Varma]: very fortunate from that perspective and what kind of strikes me is that you know that uh incident
[Amit Varma]: you narrated at the start of this episode that you're out there in the slush going towards the
[Amit Varma]: water and the sky is getting dark and you don't know whether you'll reach the water and you don't
[Amit Varma]: know whether you'll make it back and it seems like such a great metaphor for what you're just
[Amit Varma]: talking about because i also kind of feel like that sometimes that sometimes you feel alone on
[Amit Varma]: the journey but there's great beauty and you want to do it and you're doing it and you don't know
[Guest 1]: where it's gonna go and eventually you'll probably drown and and it's also by the way very very i
[Guest 1]: don't know the last part but but it's very risky right because you're not getting a huge monetary
[Guest 1]: reward out of it right uh you're not getting any tangible reward and benefit for that matter you
[Guest 1]: are entirely thriving on your own motivation and mental satisfaction and to go on year after year
[Guest 1]: just based on that but touch wood as of now it's working well i hope it continues to work well but
[Guest 1]: who knows one fine day i'll just wake up and think what am i doing with my life but as of now i think
[Amit Varma]: it's working well and i want to riff off something shrena said in her last episode with me where you
[Amit Varma]: said something to the effect of numbers or elegant equations or whatever can move you to tears right
[Amit Varma]: and i was struck by that because i sometimes feel that way not so much about economics per se but
[Amit Varma]: about figuring out a part of the world you know there's something that's muddy and suddenly it
[Amit Varma]: opens up and you see it clearly it's like something that is pixelated suddenly becomes
[Amit Varma]: high definition you know uh young indian men young indian adolescent men of the 90s will
[Amit Varma]: remember this when they were downloading porn from dial-up connections i don't know what an
[Guest 1]: analogy thank you thank you for taking us there yeah apologies but i want to mention one thing
[Guest 1]: amit is that what i also realized is that it takes a very very very long time to understand
[Guest 1]: even a small part of economics i mean forget about the vast indian economy right i mean i think i've
[Guest 1]: spent seven years just trying to understand monetary policy or inflation right and today i
[Guest 1]: can at least write some meaningful coherent articles explaining that let's say to my mother
[Guest 1]: or or a common person and i'm fairly confident i'll do a very good job of that but that's just
[Guest 1]: a really small percentage of the vast subject that economics is so it takes you have to basically
[Guest 1]: devote your life to something like this to be able to say at the fag end that maybe i have a little
[Guest 1]: bit of an expertise or maybe i have a little bit of a specialization and therefore people who call
[Guest 1]: themselves experts i i get very skeptical about those kind of claims because you have to be very
[Guest 1]: very focused and hard working for a very long time to gain even a little bit of expertise in any
[Guest 1]: subject and and focusing on indian economy i think has given me that concentration that there's just
[Guest 2]: one thing i'm doing and i just want to do it really well you know and i have to just it's funny
[Guest 2]: i was listening to rajesh and i just and i just realized one thing i wanted to just say is that
[Guest 2]: often i in fact of late i really find myself also dealing with somewhat of an imposter syndrome
[Guest 2]: because there is this thing about like do you really have the ability to what can on what basis
[Guest 2]: are you making claims right many people will ask you questions and i'm like okay so this is what i
[Guest 2]: think and sometimes i wonder is it tied up with my gender is it also tied up with the nature of
[Guest 2]: economics exactly what you said which is that i know that even to understand employment rates it's
[Guest 2]: taken us such a long period of time to construct them to understand them even now there are facets
[Guest 2]: of it that i would you know not understand and so what's happened now sometimes to me is you know
[Guest 2]: often for example for the book i'm asked lots of questions or even you know with my job people ask
[Guest 2]: and you have to obviously speak with a certain amount of confidence assurance and of course i
[Guest 2]: know my stuff but sometimes even at that same time there's this part of me that's thinking oh
[Guest 2]: this is a little bit imposterish because do you really know you know and you're always dealing
[Guest 2]: with these two voices so i i hear you but i also sometimes then feel that my battle often is to not
[Guest 2]: shy away from my own argument which is to have the conviction to say this is what i believe
[Guest 2]: i'm like for example we're fighting about Shahrukh Khan right now just as an example
[Guest 2]: i believe x he's not an economic concept but i'm just using that i believe x we may disagree and
[Guest 2]: that's fine i think sometimes the and all of us are kind of i think i'm going back to what you
[Guest 2]: had said during our last episode which has really stayed with me all of us are winging it right we
[Guest 2]: all come at it with our own base of evidence our own insights our own biases our own backstories
[Guest 2]: and i think what sometimes the main thing i think that troubles me about sometimes that
[Guest 2]: state of conversation is that we should all be okay with saying that we're all kind of winging
[Guest 2]: it and you only know as much and it's okay to then also be wrong and to update beliefs like this the
[Guest 2]: fact that the world is Bayesian the world should be Bayesian we should all be updating our beliefs
[Guest 2]: that to me is if there is one economic and statistical construct which i think is so
[Guest 2]: important in our lives especially the way the modern world is just constantly changing
[Guest 2]: it is this idea of Bayesian you know probability which is that you should be constantly updating
[Guest 2]: your priors and i think so for me i completely echo what i think Rajeshwari was saying
[Guest 2]: but i also feel that in my own self i find that i really struggle with this part imposter syndrome
[Guest 2]: and then sometimes i get angry because then you're always in a room and i'm sure this has
[Guest 2]: happened to you Rajeshwari you're always in a room with lots of men and men also have their
[Guest 2]: imposter syndrome but they deal with it by being even more know-it-all they're very good at
[Guest 2]: dealing with it exactly and then i feel like i need to be even more aggressive and there's this
[Guest 2]: like escalation of aggression and i think i'm at this stage in my career where it's not so much
[Guest 2]: just a technical journey but it's also just a psychological journey of like how do you now
[Guest 2]: take what you know which you've built you know a long period of years investing in building
[Guest 2]: nurturing and then engage with the world in a way which is still respectful and not this sort of you
[Guest 1]: know constant fight so i'll say two things here so remember i mean during the course of this
[Guest 1]: conversation before the break you said that economics is about understanding the behavior
[Guest 1]: of people right and therefore we should be able to interpret and analyze that and put it in simple
[Guest 1]: language but it's very very hard right i mean i mean to reach the stage where you can analyze
[Guest 1]: the behavior of people in simple terms and to put it and express it even simpler terms that takes
[Guest 1]: years to reach that kind of confidence and that you have the grasp over the basic concepts and
[Guest 1]: intuition and interconnections to say okay i can now say this right so i it's a it's a very good
[Guest 1]: fake quality that we should all have and we should aspire to do but what i'm trying to say is that
[Guest 1]: it's a very long process i mean you can't just become an economist and get trained and start
[Guest 1]: doing that right you have to to build years of expertise and knowledge and and and it's good
[Guest 1]: that if you if you sort of try to focus on that and the other thing that i will try to say is that
[Guest 1]: i think i was always very conscious about the fact that i'm entering into a male-dominated
[Guest 1]: profession and somewhere down the line that was a very very important factor in my mind
[Guest 1]: and again much of this will come when we talk about my life backstory but i became even more
[Guest 1]: conscious of it when i came back to india because in india i realized there are two things that you
[Guest 1]: fight against as an aspiring economist one is your gender and the other is your age right you
[Guest 1]: are never taken seriously particularly in policy circles unless you are of a certain age you have
[Guest 1]: graying hair and all of that i mean before that people won't even take you seriously in whatever
[Guest 1]: you are saying no matter how well you know the concepts etc and on top of that if you're a woman
[Guest 1]: so if you're a young woman recently returned from the u.s there is no possibility that anybody's
[Guest 1]: going to take you seriously so i had to struggle and now of course i mean i'm not even there yet
[Guest 1]: i'm still in the midway but i had to struggle a lot to make my voice heard even as something like
[Guest 1]: a panel discussion where everybody else would be a man and i'm just struggling to make my voice heard
[Guest 1]: on one particular question where they are all just being very aggressive and their body language is
[Guest 1]: very different so you're fighting at multiple levels you're trying to understand the subject
[Guest 1]: you're trying to understand what's happening in the economy and you're trying to sort of be the
[Guest 1]: lone female voice in a room full of men you also don't want to look that you're being overshadowed
[Guest 1]: by them so it's it's a constant struggle and out of all of that if you get one output ready where
[Guest 1]: you can say okay i've understood this slice of the world i think that's a tremendous achievement and
[Guest 2]: that's what i pat myself at the back you know in fact i have to just say in fact now my goal
[Guest 2]: when i go into a room and it's it sounds is actually i'm very comfortable being overshadowed
[Guest 2]: because then i often know that maybe i've learned a lot about male psychology modes of behavior and
[Guest 2]: i know it's material for my next book you know and that's the way i now learn to deal with it because
[Guest 2]: you know in life i've just especially in this field because you do have time there's a kind
[Guest 2]: of person who enters this arena of the world right somewhat type a fairly ambitious everybody's
[Guest 2]: really bright everyone you know is coming at it with their own good intentions and so with that
[Guest 2]: there's always going to be this elbowing there'll be a lot there's a lot of status jockeying that's
[Guest 2]: just you know the thing that's part of life and now i've actually i think my way of handling it
[Guest 2]: is to just almost say there was a time in fact i was the exact opposite i want to just you know
[Guest 2]: i want to like be you know this thing i need to be heard and but i learned in fact i'll just
[Guest 2]: share this story one of the first bureaucrats i ever worked with and he who shall definitely
[Guest 2]: not be named used to not even look at me and he'd look at my male colleagues and then the
[Guest 2]: question would come to me but through my male colleagues and in fact the same chap was i had
[Guest 2]: walked into a room on my own and he just kept looking behind me at the door and he said
[Guest 2]: and he said world bank wow yeah exactly right now cut to it's been it was nearly seven years
[Guest 2]: seven eight years um he's i know where he's going through a really difficult time because
[Guest 2]: there are lots of really powerful women in the service and he has to deal with the fact that
[Guest 2]: you know there are more and more women coming in to positions of authority and are also in think
[Guest 2]: tanks and and i can see him struggling and so i've sort of learned to i used to get really angry
[Guest 2]: and maybe i should still get angry but i think i've also learned that perhaps this is where
[Guest 2]: creativity and humor and all of that really helps right because you just have to be able to just
[Guest 2]: wear it a bit lightly or else it just becomes it can just be exhausting i think i think you're
[Guest 1]: right that i think the the the male economist and since that's the only profession i know
[Guest 1]: it's a struggle for them too right i mean they are used to a traditional world where it's just them
[Guest 1]: right and suddenly you see these women walking into the room who are equally if not more competent
[Guest 1]: they also have a voice they're aggressive they want to speak up how to deal with that kind of a
[Guest 1]: two genders in the same room i think men struggle a lot more than women that's been my experience
[Amit Varma]: i'd actually cut my men a little less slack than you're cutting them because i think i i think it's
[Amit Varma]: actually a welcome uh sort of is welcome growth you know the men should welcome looking you know
[Amit Varma]: being able but it doesn't happen that way no and another thing that
[Amit Varma]: i feel like there should be a segue side episode which we will not record
[Amit Varma]: we can do another five hour episode on this but one thing that strikes me from what both of you
[Amit Varma]: are saying which is very poignant and this is something i've noticed for every single female
[Amit Varma]: guest who's come on this show is that to get to wherever they are they've had to jump more hoops
[Amit Varma]: than any man who would have to like just being conscious all the time like in a sense men can
[Amit Varma]: be like feral animals not even be aware of the impulses and what they how their egos are making
[Amit Varma]: them behave and they're just going through all of those motions but women have to be constantly
[Amit Varma]: aware of these dynamics that why do i get interrupted all the time why do i get talked
[Guest 1]: down on and you have to come past that even have the opposite experience where i have been invited
[Guest 1]: to events because they wanted to have a woman on stage i i mean it's just like you go from one
[Guest 1]: extreme where you are genuinely invited maybe because you're good but then you enter a room
[Guest 1]: full of 40 men and you have to be loud and aggressive otherwise you can't be heard to the
[Guest 1]: other extreme where you're invited only because they need to have a woman on stage doesn't matter
[Guest 1]: what your merit and what your arguments are and what do you do in that kind of a forum do i turn
[Guest 1]: it down where show up what do i do so it's like you're jostling these two different extremes
[Guest 1]: and while in the middle you're just trying to figure your own shit out basically i also think
[Guest 2]: a lot of it is you know women are socialized also to just constantly be aware of the gaze of everyone
[Guest 2]: in the room and even games that doesn't exist i definitely have had moments when i have thought
[Guest 2]: that male colleagues of mine are looking down on my argument when actually later i realized that
[Guest 2]: that was not true at all right and and when i have a program to think like that exactly and
[Guest 2]: whereas if you talk to men they are not they haven't internalized the gaze of the other to
[Guest 2]: that extent maybe it's just the boss right but i will also i'll agree with you on one thing which
[Guest 2]: is that i do i i hear what rajeshwari is saying and i've seen this men are struggling as well
[Guest 2]: we have a crisis of masculinity it's in all professions but i i agree with which is that
[Guest 2]: the less slack i give is sometimes it really irritates me and i see this now a lot with more
[Guest 2]: and more women entering the kinds of things that are said behind in the sort of there is still a
[Guest 2]: locker room right even amongst economists there is locker room talk boys who work at things there
[Guest 1]: are things that are said it's a typical thing right if a female economist has made a good
[Guest 2]: name for herself there must be something to it like who's the male who's supporting her or who
[Guest 1]: she's sleeping with as brazen as that right yeah i mean there is something more to it than just a
[Guest 1]: success as an economist absolutely but if it's a male economist of course i mean come on it's
[Guest 2]: just brilliant yeah he's hard working yeah who'd sleep with them exactly those those objectives are
[Guest 1]: not applied to the woman at the first brush and you just know it and at some point you just brush
[Guest 1]: it off and say you know what i don't care yeah exactly i honestly don't care what you're gonna
[Guest 1]: say about me because you're gonna say nevertheless so i'll just do what i want to do and for whatever
[Guest 1]: you want to talk keep talking so i think at some point i think we develop a very thick skin
[Guest 1]: and you know and that's the only way to survive and do well and now i don't even notice the men
[Guest 1]: in the room right i mean they're all like they're all people they're there i do my job they do their
[Guest 1]: job and i'm out of it i mean that i've reached that stage at least and i'm happy about that
[Guest 2]: no i i do notice the i think i'm still at this phase i do have to deal with that gaze it does
[Guest 2]: bother me the back the back talk also bothers me because one here the one thing about of course
[Guest 2]: this is i don't know what bombay is like but in delhi people only say mean things about you to
[Guest 2]: strangers because they know that you will hear them eventually like it just circles back right
[Guest 2]: like the world is small um and so of course it bothers one but i i've now also realized that i
[Guest 2]: have to just acknowledge exactly what rajesh free was saying which is that it is part of a big social
[Guest 2]: shift that i think the profession men and women are going through so i may be part of the generation
[Guest 2]: that just has to deal with some of the fallout of it and that's fine because you know i so much is
[Guest 2]: otherwise is going well but there is this psychological nonsense that you're dealing with
[Guest 2]: along with having to be technically proficient which i do think that at least men in the
[Guest 2]: profession i don't think face as much and let's hope that you i think i think the scrutiny that
[Guest 1]: we are subjected to is a lot higher yeah you have to prove your metal a lot harder and a lot more
[Amit Varma]: but i love shrena's way of dealing with it which is i'm going to put it in my next book exactly
[Guest 1]: which is great i can't wait for your next book yeah absolutely yeah so we have like 15 minutes
[Amit Varma]: left before shrena's got to go to this top secret meeting so we'll just rush through uh some broad
[Amit Varma]: questions and when i say rush through let's rush through them because people have and these are
[Amit Varma]: kind of big issues and one is i have a question for each of you on inflation so rajeshwari you're
[Amit Varma]: the macro person and my question is that everybody wants to know what's causing it and what can be
[Amit Varma]: done and so on and so forth okay is there a potted answer to this or is it too complicated i mean okay
[Guest 1]: let me try to cut it really short and not give a very longish answer so what's causing it there are
[Guest 1]: a lot of supply chain constraints right so the supply side has gotten completely messed up one
[Guest 1]: because of the pandemic now because of the russia ukraine war we import oil crude oil edible oil
[Guest 1]: fertilizer all the major items that we import the prices have gone up globally so we are basically
[Guest 1]: importing that high inflation um and also the china lockdowns because of the resurgence of the
[Guest 1]: pandemic that is further squeezing the supply chain so it's a supply side related so inflation
[Guest 1]: happens when when demand is greater than the supply now demand is weak and supply is even
[Guest 1]: weaker so that is creating the situation of excess demand which is pushing prices up as simple as
[Guest 1]: that so it's basically the supply side constraints that's causing inflation and how it is going to go
[Guest 1]: away well there has to be some waking up required on the part of the reserve bank of india to
[Guest 1]: understand that inflation control is ultimately their job and they need to go back to the table
[Guest 1]: to do their job it's basically as simple as that but in reality of course they're far from it
[Guest 1]: because they have they are dealing with multiple objectives this complete lack of central bank
[Guest 1]: independence etc all of that is going on but bottom line is you have to use monetary policy
[Amit Varma]: to deal with inflation and that's not getting done and my question for shrena actually comes
[Amit Varma]: from shruti rajgopalan because the moment i said on twitter that i'm chatting with two economists
[Amit Varma]: she immediately replied who are these economists and i was like they're both friends of yours don't
[Amit Varma]: worry so uh the her question for you is uh and it's a great question which is how does inflation
[Guest 2]: impact men and women differently oh gosh that is a very good question so a couple of things
[Guest 2]: one is uh well if you look at intra-household distribution because one thing we know right
[Guest 2]: bargaining theory intra-household bargaining theory teaches us that if prices go up or
[Guest 2]: household aggregate consumption indicators because of price amount is impacted essentially women's
[Guest 2]: access to goods within the household always becomes lower so nutrition outcomes could be affected if
[Guest 2]: you start to reduce consumption of goods consumption of oil consumption of basic food baskets there's
[Guest 2]: a nutritional aspect to it which is very much happening we're not yet seeing like core evidence
[Guest 2]: on it but anecdotally and certainly in research that's coming out of journalists you're picking
[Guest 2]: this up right so that's one so anytime household resources are squeezed because of gender norms
[Guest 2]: within the household women eat less women consume less investment in also women's human capital
[Guest 2]: may start to reduce because you need to offset the increase in price right so the way you do
[Guest 2]: that is you manage the amount that is being consumed by female members of the families
[Guest 2]: that's one so there's an impact on nutrition and health human capital all of that the other which
[Guest 2]: is I think more worrying is sometimes families respond to increases in prices particularly now
[Guest 2]: since we're looking at transport prices being impacted which I think is a very big and important
[Guest 2]: section is that anyway as we know families are reluctant to let women travel out or let them
[Guest 2]: use money to essentially access the world outside the moment you now have a world in which those
[Guest 2]: prices are going further up unsurprisingly the reluctance is only going to now find an excuse
[Guest 2]: so almost patriarchy will find an excuse in prices I think that's the best way to put it right
[Guest 2]: which is to say well now you know it's just become so expensive like let the boy go
[Guest 2]: let him handle all the dealings with the world outside in one travel out right I'm keeping this
[Guest 2]: really micro and very simple just for people even who don't come from an econ background to
[Guest 2]: understand and then you basically say well let the boy go he can do you know household marketing
[Guest 2]: anything else he needs to do you don't necessarily need to go to so there are fears that feminist
[Guest 2]: economists have had that inflation actually leads to reduce mobility outcomes often for women as
[Guest 2]: well for men it's far more straightforward right it is actually of course an impact on income
[Guest 2]: impact on savings all kinds of insurance behavior as well is impacted your labor market decisions
[Guest 2]: about how you work where you work all of that would be impacted as well but I think Shruti's
[Guest 2]: question which is I think why she always asks these really good questions is also to get us to
[Guest 2]: think that this is why you need a feminist lens to economics because if you were to just look and I
[Guest 2]: think Rajeshree will agree with me if you were to just look at the impact on inflation much like
[Guest 2]: medicine where a lot of the experiments on for drugs are done on men's bodies and then you report
[Guest 2]: results saying that this works for women also actually a lot of these channels work very
[Guest 2]: differently based on norms right gender is a good example of that because it's such a strong norm
[Guest 2]: here so I would I think the answer to her question is that because of intra-household bargains I
[Guest 2]: would anticipate theory would suggest that consumption of core goods investment in human
[Guest 2]: capital and mobility outcomes would be impacted data has not yet been fully tracked but we do know
[Guest 2]: that when this happens you do tend to see some of these but in the realm of correlation and the last
[Guest 2]: thing I will say here is that another thing that does happen often is that the reliance on welfare
[Guest 2]: increases particularly for women I think going back to what we were talking about also what
[Guest 1]: happens is reliance on gold increases yes so buying of gold jewelry goes up significantly
[Guest 1]: when inflation is high and volatile and that is something that is very damaging for the economy
[Guest 1]: because you're essentially taking the savings out of the formal sector and we see that always happen
[Amit Varma]: in India when you mentioned the feminist lens on economics I remember one of my past guests
[Amit Varma]: Menal Pandey when I was editing this policy magazine Pragati had once written a piece for
[Amit Varma]: me about in the context of agriculture but it's true in any other context is that it's typical
[Amit Varma]: to talk about the agricultural a problem with Indian agriculture in a particular way but if
[Amit Varma]: you look deeper you go one layer deeper there's women in Indian agriculture and that's a much
[Amit Varma]: worse problem and similarly you look at literally any issue in India and you you know you look far
[Amit Varma]: enough you'll find that there's another layer and there are the women there and they're not being
[Guest 1]: spoken about and it's just it's almost like it's one homogenous problem is that just as we were
[Guest 1]: discussing just as no one cares about how why women's lfpr is so low no one cares about how
[Guest 1]: inflation is going to impact women from a policymaker's perspective because it's just like
[Guest 1]: a complete non-existent section of the population why would women be impacted by inflation what
[Guest 1]: about women jobs right so it's not even in the discourse I mean here it's a really small minority
[Guest 1]: that is discussing it but if you go out there and if you talk to a central bank or if you talk to
[Guest 1]: the policymakers I mean they'll just give you a look and say what are you even talking about I
[Guest 2]: mean why should we even worry about these things you know and in fact what I find most insulting
[Guest 2]: is often when this question is asked and you know during budget conversation what is the gharilu
[Guest 2]: budget how will the housewife react to the budget you know how so inflation often in fact the way I
[Guest 2]: just answered it typically when on in newsrooms and I think Rajeshwari is rigorously nodding her
[Guest 2]: head in yes when you discuss inflation for women there is a discussion but it is this steeped in
[Guest 2]: you know masculinist models of the economy where the impact on inflation is only on how wives have
[Guest 2]: to cut corners to you know manage the household budget but actually we live in a country when
[Guest 2]: there is inflation wives consumption is going to reduce that we often don't talk about right
[Guest 2]: I don't know I really one thing I just want to echo I completely I think no one I don't know
[Guest 2]: but no one cares because we hear a lot of lip service these schemes for women all of that I
[Guest 2]: think it's in the realm of lip service but actually getting into the granularities of you know I've
[Guest 2]: often now said markets don't like single women in particular look at the housing market credit
[Guest 2]: markets instruments that are out there I don't see I would love for the ministry of women and
[Guest 2]: child to say you know what we're going to set up at least a commission or something to look at how
[Guest 2]: do we make some of these markets more friendly for single women because you don't have a dual income
[Guest 2]: you're still often supporting families you're at your own it's non-existent and yet actually we
[Guest 2]: are entering a world where more and more women like myself are going to be single for longer
[Guest 2]: periods of time we are dealing with markets and these markets are actually core to the jobs crisis
[Guest 2]: because you're not going to solve the jobs crisis without attacking the housing and credit markets
[Guest 1]: in fact I'll tell you that you know if the whole idea of financial planning for yourself that is
[Guest 1]: completely non-existent in the women's realm I mean you wouldn't see financial advisors talking
[Guest 1]: to women and giving them advice on how do you plan your pension insurance etc because the entire
[Guest 1]: discussion is very head of the family centric and that's obviously very male centric but what if I
[Guest 1]: as a woman irrespective of whether I'm single or married I want to do my own financial planning
[Guest 1]: build my own financial portfolio where is the advice for me and that is just so difficult to
[Guest 1]: find because no no wait it has to be in conjunction with the head of the household and it has to be a
[Guest 1]: family planning it cannot be an individualistic single woman or whatever married woman planning
[Guest 1]: so I think this this is going to take decades to even reach a stage where we can see any change
[Amit Varma]: happen I think there's a lot to think about in everything both of you said the only part
[Amit Varma]: I will disagree with is I don't think a ministry setting up a commission is going to help
[Unknown]: yeah this is my Delhi panna coming out but here's the thing
[Guest 2]: but I do but what I I'm using that it could be anything look but I really think we need
[Amit Varma]: an instrument that's it yeah yeah yeah no it's a big problem it has to be solved but ministry
[Amit Varma]: and commission are not so we've got five minutes left there are tons of great questions so I just
[Amit Varma]: want to apologize to people who took the trouble to put these in twitter and say look I'm so sorry
[Amit Varma]: of some fantastic questions really we'll come back again we will come back exactly so you'll
[Amit Varma]: come back again and we'll get to ask them so I'll end with this one last question and I really like
[Amit Varma]: the way it was framed and it's interesting which is it's from a gentleman named Das whose twitter
[Amit Varma]: id is at kitchenchemprof and he asked what is the cost of happiness is it trending up or down or
[Amit Varma]: sunk maybe you can answer this in a personal way if you can't give a generalized answer obviously
[Amit Varma]: so say the questioning is what is the cost of what is the cost of happiness is it trending up or down
[Guest 2]: it's trending up it's trending up because um the costs of well first just the financial costs
[Guest 2]: of seeking pleasure stability economic the first layer of happiness is some amount of stability
[Guest 2]: and assurance those we were just talking about inflation that's trending up right it's trending
[Guest 2]: up also because our social institutions and our political institutions our discourse is such that
[Guest 2]: to even voice voice is the second layer of happiness the cost of voice is very high nowadays
[Guest 2]: we all know it and the third reason I think it's also trending up is when you have conservative
[Guest 2]: turns in societies like we are going through often happiness requires taking risks and saying things
[Guest 2]: that may be misunderstood and I think now the costs of being misunderstood are very high so
[Guest 1]: I think to me it's it's trending up so I would say once again I can't help think of the gender
[Guest 1]: here right and I'm going to think exclusively from the female lens I think definitely the
[Guest 1]: cost is going up because the cost of happiness going up means that in order to do something that
[Guest 1]: makes you happy what are the obstacles that you're facing and I think increasingly if I'm redefining
[Guest 1]: my happiness as something that I want to go out in the world I want to make a career for myself
[Guest 1]: I want to earn my own money and I want to step into the male-dominated profession of course I
[Guest 1]: am encountering obstacle after obstacle and to that extent that cost of my happiness is of course
[Guest 1]: going up now if I compare that with let's say a previous generation who were defining happiness
[Guest 1]: differently that I'm just going to stay at home look after my there's nothing wrong in it I'm just
[Guest 1]: saying the choice set may have changed and the more we are getting more ambitious the more we want
[Guest 1]: to be empowered the more we are paying a cost for it because we are encountering more and more
[Guest 1]: obstacles so I think definitely and it's going to continue to trend up gosh I hate this we entered
[Guest 2]: on a pessimistic note where I put it's pessimistic no I mean but but it's a cost that all of us are
[Guest 1]: many of us are bearing yeah I think that's okay to bear the cost right we are not complaining
[Guest 1]: so it's not sunk exactly it is what it is I mean it is what it is exactly this is the reality I mean
[Guest 1]: would we would I rather bear the cost and or as opposed to just you know do the opposite of course
[Amit Varma]: I would bear the cost exactly so to that extent it's fine wonderful so Rajeshwari, Shrayana thank
[Amit Varma]: you so much for coming on the show this has been such a great conversation it should have gone on
[Amit Varma]: for five hours more but okay we'll make do this time and you will come back again 100 percent
[Guest 1]: thank you so much for inviting us back thank you so much Amit and it was a pleasure knowing Shrayana
[Guest 1]: as well in this podcast I think we basically just just ended up having a good adda and I
[Amit Varma]: thoroughly enjoyed it except that before this you were bong-splaining her name to me and saying Amit
[Guest 1]: is not Shrayana is Shrayona and then she came and said it's Shrayana yes I've been proved wrong and
[Guest 2]: on that note it was a magical time being here with Rajeshwari thank you so much if you enjoyed
[Amit Varma]: listening to this episode check out the show notes for many more rabbit holes you can follow Shrayana
[Amit Varma]: on twitter at bshrayana you can follow Rajeshwari on twitter not because she's not on social media
[Amit Varma]: which is why she is so productive and gets so much work done you can follow me on twitter though
[Amit Varma]: because i'm not quite as productive at amit varma a-m-i-t-v-a-r-m-a you can browse past episodes
[Amit Varma]: of the scene in the unseen at seen unseen dot i-n thank you for listening did you enjoy this episode
[Amit Varma]: of the scene in the unseen if so would you like to support the production of the show you can go over
[Amit Varma]: to seen unseen dot i n slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive
[Amit Varma]: and kicking thank you you